496 
21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–24 Edition) § 133.113 
whey from curd. The whey is drained 
off, and the curd is removed to another 
vat containing hot whey, in which it is 
soaked for several hours. This whey is 
withdrawn, the curd is allowed to mat, 
and is cut into blocks. These are 
washed in hot whey until the desired 
elasticity is obtained. The curd is re-
moved from the vat, drained, pressed 
into oblong forms, dried, and salted in 
brine, and cured. It may be paraffined. 
A harmless preparation of enzymes of 
animal or plant origin capable of aid-
ing in the curing or development of fla-
vor of caciocavallo siciliano cheese 
may be added during the procedure, in 
such quantity that the weight of the 
solids of such preparation is not more 
than 0.1 percent of the weight of the 
milk used. 
(c)(1) For the purposes of this sec-
tion, the word ‘‘milk’’ means cow’s 
milk or goat’s milk or sheep’s milk or 
mixtures of two or all of these. Such 
milk may be adjusted by separating 
part of the fat therefrom or (in the case 
of cow’s milk) by adding one or more of 
the following: Cream, skim milk, con-
centrated skim milk, nonfat dry milk; 
(in the case of goat’s milk) the cor-
responding products from goat’s milk; 
(in the case of sheep’s milk) the cor-
responding products from sheep’s milk; 
water in a quantity sufficient to recon-
stitute any such concentrated or dried 
products used. 
(2) Such milk may be bleached by the 
use of benzoyl peroxide or a mixture of 
benzoyl peroxide with potassium alum, 
calcium sulfate, and magnesium car-
bonate; but the weight of the benzoyl 
peroxide is not more than 0.002 percent 
of the weight of the milk bleached, and 
the weight of the potassium alum, cal-
cium sulfate, and magnesium car-
bonate, singly or combined, is not more 
than six times the weight of the ben-
zoyl peroxide used. If milk is bleached 
in this manner, sufficient vitamin A is 
added to the curd to compensate for 
the vitamin A or its precursors de-
stroyed in the bleaching process, and 
artificial coloring is not used. 
(d) Safe and suitable antimycotic 
agent(s), the cumulative levels of 
which shall not exceed current good 
manufacturing practice, may be added 
to the cheese during the kneading and 
stretching process and/or applied to the 
surface of the cheese. 
(e) When caciocavallo siciliano 
cheese is made solely from cow’s milk, 
the name of such cheese is 
‘‘Caciocavallo siciliano cheese’’. When 
made from sheep’s milk or goat’s milk 
or mixtures of these, or one or both of 
these with cow’s milk, the name is fol-
lowed by the words ‘‘made from 
______’’, the blank being filled in with 
the name or names of the milks used, 
in order of predominance by weight. 
(f) Label declaration. Each of the in-
gredients used in the food shall be de-
clared on the label as required by the 
applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 
of this chapter, except that enzymes of 
animal, plant, or microbial origin may 
be declared as ‘‘enzymes’’. 
[42 FR 14366, Mar. 15, 1977, as amended at 42 
FR 39102, Aug. 2, 1977; 48 FR 49013, Oct. 24, 
1983; 49 FR 10093, Mar. 19, 1984; 58 FR 2892, 
Jan. 6, 1993] 
§ 133.113 Cheddar cheese. 
(a) Description. (1) Cheddar cheese is 
the food prepared by the procedure set 
forth in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, 
or by any other procedure which pro-
duces a finished cheese having the 
same physical and chemical properties. 
The minimum milkfat content is 50 
percent by weight of the solids, and the 
maximum moisture content is 39 per-
cent by weight, as determined by the 
methods described in § 133.5. If the 
dairy ingredients used are not pasteur-
ized, the cheese is cured at a tempera-
ture of not less than 35 °F for at least 
60 days. 
(2) If pasteurized dairy ingredients 
are used, the phenol equivalent value 
of 0.25 gram of cheddar cheese is not 
more than 3 micrograms as determined 
by the method described in § 133.5. 
(3) One or more of the dairy ingredi-
ents specified in paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section may be warmed, treated 
with hydrogen peroxide/catalase, and is 
subjected to the action of a lactic acid- 
producing bacterial culture. One or 
more of the clotting enzymes specified 
in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is 
added to set the dairy ingredients to a 
semisolid mass. The mass is so cut, 
stirred, and heated with continued stir-
ring, as to promote and regulate the 
separation of whey and curd. The whey 
497 
Food and Drug Administration, HHS § 133.118 
is drained off, and the curd is matted 
into a cohesive mass. The mass is cut 
into slabs, which are so piled and han-
dled as to promote the drainage of 
whey and the development of acidity. 
The slabs are then cut into pieces, 
which may be rinsed by sprinkling or 
pouring water over them, with free and 
continuous drainage; but the duration 
of such rinsing is so limited that only 
the whey on the surface of such pieces 
is removed. The curd is salted, stirred, 
further drained, and pressed into 
forms. One or more of the other op-
tional ingredients specified in para-
graph (b)(3) of this section may be 
added during the procedure. 
(b) Optional ingredients. The following 
safe and suitable ingredients may be 
used: 
(1) Dairy ingredients. Milk, nonfat 
milk, or cream, as defined in § 133.3, 
used alone or in combination. 
(2) Clotting enzymes. Rennet and/or 
other clotting enzymes of animal, 
plant, or microbial origin. 
(3) Other optional ingredients. (i) 
Coloring. 
(ii) Calcium chloride in an amount 
not more than 0.02 percent (calculated 
as anhydrous calcium chloride) of the 
weight of the dairy ingredients, used as 
a coagulation aid. 
(iii) Enzymes of animal, plant, or mi-
crobial origin, used in curing or flavor 
development. 
(iv) Antimycotic agents, applied to 
the surface of slices or cuts in con-
sumer-sized packages. 
(v) Hydrogen peroxide, followed by a 
sufficient quantity of catalase prepara-
tion to eliminate the hydrogen per-
oxide. The weight of the hydrogen per-
oxide shall not exceed 0.05 percent of 
the weight of the milk and the weight 
of the catalase shall not exceed 20 parts 
per million of the weight of the milk 
treated. 
(c) Nomenclature. The name of the 
food is ‘‘cheddar cheese’’. 
(d) Label declaration. Each of the in-
gredients used in the food shall be de-
clared on the label as required by the 
applicable sections of parts 101 and 130 
of this chapter, except that: 
(1) Enzymes of animal, plant, or mi-
crobial origin may be declared as ‘‘en-
zymes’’; and 
(2) The dairy ingredients may be de-
clared, in descending order or predomi-
nance, by the use of the terms ‘‘milkfat 
and nonfat milk’’ or ‘‘nonfat milk and 
milkfat’’, as appropriate. 
[48 FR 2743, Jan. 21, 1983; 48 FR 11426, Mar. 18, 
1983, as amended at 58 FR 2892, Jan. 6, 1993] 
§ 133.114 Cheddar cheese for manufac-
turing. 
Cheddar cheese for manufacturing 
conforms to the definition and stand-
ard of identity prescribed for cheddar 
cheese by § 133.113, except that the milk 
is not pasteurized, curing is not re-
quired, and the provisions of paragraph 
(b)(3)(iv) of that section do not apply. 
[48 FR 2743, Jan. 21, 1983] 
§ 133.116 Low sodium cheddar cheese. 
Low sodium cheddar cheese is the 
food prepared from the same ingredi-
ents and in the same manner pre-
scribed in § 133.113 for cheddar cheese 
and complies with all the provisions of 
§ 133.113, including the requirements for 
label statement of ingredients, except 
that: 
(a) It contains not more than 96 mil-
ligrams of sodium per pound of finished 
food. 
(b) The name of the food is ‘‘low so-
dium cheddar cheese’’. The letters in 
the words ‘‘low sodium’’ shall be of the 
same size and style of type as the let-
ters in the words ‘‘cheddar cheese’’, 
wherever such words appear on the 
label. 
(c) If a salt substitute is used, the 
label shall bear the statement ‘‘ ______ 
added as a salt substitute’’, the blank 
being filled in with the common name 
or names of the ingredient or ingredi-
ents used as a salt substitute. 
[48 FR 2743, Jan. 21, 1983, as amended at 85 
FR 72907, Nov. 16, 2020] 
§ 133.118 Colby cheese. 
(a) Colby cheese is the food prepared 
from milk and other ingredients speci-
fied in this section, by the procedure 
set forth in paragraph (b) of this sec-
tion, or by another procedure which 
produces a finished cheese having the 
same physical and chemical properties 
as the cheese produced when the proce-
dure set forth in paragraph (b) of this 
section is used. It contains not more 
