SGR 129
Fish and Fishery Products  
Hazards  and C ontrols Guidance 
Fourth Edition –  MARCH 2020
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
CENTER FOR FOOD SAFETY AND APPLIED NUTRITION
OFFICE OF FOOD SAFETY

Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and 
Controls Guidance
Fourth Edition – March 2020
Additional copies may be purchased from:  
Florida Sea Grant 
IFAS - Extension Bookstore 
University of Florida 
P.O. Box 110011 
Gainesville, FL 32611-0011 
(800) 226-1764
www.ifasbooks.com 
Copies of this guidance document may be downloaded from:
www.FDA.gov/Seafood 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
(240) 402-2300
March 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS : FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS HAZARDS 
AND CONTROLS GUIDANCE  - FOURTH EDITION - MARCH 2020
Chapter Page
Guidance for Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Control Guidance …………………….………… G - 1
CHAPTER 1: General Information …………………………………………………………………………………………….………….. 1 – 1
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan ………………………………….………. 2 – 1
CHAPTER 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards ………………………………………….……… 3 – 1
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens from the Harvest Area …………………………………………………………………………….……… 75
CHAPTER 5: Parasites ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………...….. 91
CHAPTER 6: Natural Toxins ………………………………………………………………………………………………………….....…. 6 – 1
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation ………………………………………………………………………......… 113
CHAPTER 8: Other Decomposition-Related Hazards ……………………………………………………………………...…… 153
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides ……………………………………………...…… 155
CHAPTER 10: Methylmercury ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….……. 181
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs ………………………………………………………………………………………………….……. 183
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other than Clostridium botulinum)
 as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse …………………………...................…………………………..………
209
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation …………………………………………………………………...…… 245
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying ………… 293
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes …………………………………….309
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization ……………………………………….315
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product
 Characteristics ……………………………………………………………………………...........………………………………………
331
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking 
Processes ..............................................................................................…………………………………………..
345
CHAPTER 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Certain Food Intolerances Causing Substances …….. 19 – 1
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion …………………………………………………………...…………………………………………………. 385
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion …………………........…………………………………………………………………………………….. 395
APPENDIX 1: Forms ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… 405
APPENDIX 2: Product Flow Diagram – Example …………………………………………………………………………………….. 411
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree ………………………………………………………………………………….. 413
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation ……………………………………………………………………….417
APPENDIX 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance …………………………………………………….A5 – 1
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw …………………………………………..443
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood Processing-Public Health 
Impacts …………………………………………………………………………………………………............……………………………
451
APPENDIX 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products ….A8 – 1
APPENDIX 9: Allergen Cleaning and Sanitation ………………………………….………………………………………………… A9 – 1
APPENDIX 10: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention ………………………………………………………………………………. A10 – 1
(March 2020). 
Table of Contents. 
GUIDANCE FOR THE INDUSTRY : FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS HAZARDS  
AND CONTROLS GUIDANCE FOURTH EDITION  - MARCH 2020
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
I. INTRODUCTION 
This guidance is intended to assist processors of 
fish and fishery products in the development of 
their Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) 
plans. Processors of fish and fishery products will 
find information in this guidance that will help 
them identify hazards that are associated with 
their products and help them formulate control 
strategies. The guidance will help consumers and 
the public generally to understand commercial 
seafood safety in terms of hazards and their 
controls. The guidance does not specifically address 
safe handling practices by consumers or by retail 
establishments, although many of the concepts 
contained in this guidance are applicable to both. 
This guidance is also intended to serve as a tool to 
be used by federal and state regulatory officials in 
the evaluation of HACCP plans for fish and fishery 
products. 
FDA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, 
do not establish legally enforceable responsibilities. 
Instead, guidance describes the Agency’s current 
thinking on a topic and should be viewed only 
as recommendations, unless specific regulatory 
or statutory requirements are cited. The use of 
the word should in Agency guidance means that 
something is suggested or recommended, but not 
required. 
This guidance has been prepared by the Division 
of Seafood Safety in the Center for Food Safety 
and Applied Nutrition at the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration. 
II.   DISCUSSION 
A.  Scope and Limitations  
The control strategies and practices provided in 
this guidance are recommendations to the fish and 
fishery products industry unless they are required 
by regulation or statute. This guidance provides 
information that would likely result in a HACCP plan 
that is acceptable to FDA. Processors may choose 
to use other control strategies, as long as they 
comply with the requirements of the applicable food 
safety laws and regulations. However, processors 
that chose to use other control strategies (e.g., 
critical limits) should scientifically establish their 
adequacy.
The information contained in the tables in Chapter 3 
and in Chapters 4 through 21 provide guidance for 
determining which hazards are “reasonably likely 
to occur” in particular fish and fishery products 
under ordinary circumstances. However, the tables 
should not be used separately for this purpose. The 
tables list potential hazards for specific species and 
finished product types. This information should be 
combined with the information in the subsequent 
chapters to determine the likelihood of occurrence.
The guidance is not a substitute for the performance 
of a hazard analysis by a processor of fish and 
fishery products, as required by FDA’s regulations. 
Hazards not covered by this guidance may be 
relevant to certain products under certain 
circumstances. In particular, processors should 
be alert to new or emerging problems (e.g., the 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
G - 1 (March 2020). 
occurrence of natural toxins in fish not previously 
associated with that toxin).
FDA announced its adoption of final regulations 
to ensure the safe and sanitary processing of fish 
and fishery products in the Federal Register  of 
December 18, 1995 (60 FR 65096) (hereinafter 
referred to as the Seafood HACCP Regulation). This 
guidance, the Seafood HACCP Regulation (21 CFR 
123), and the Control of Communicable Diseases 
regulation (21 CFR 1240) apply to all aquatic animal 
life, other than birds and mammals, used as food 
for human consumption. For example, in addition 
to fresh and saltwater finfish and crustaceans, 
this guidance applies to echinoderms such as 
sea cucumbers and sea urchins; reptiles such as 
alligators and turtles; amphibians such as frogs; 
and to all mollusks, including land snails (escargot). 
It also applies to extracts and derivatives of fish, 
such as eggs (roe), oil, cartilage, and fish protein 
concentrate. In addition, this guidance applies to 
products that are mixtures of fish and non-fish 
ingredients, such as tuna sandwiches and soups. 
Appendix 8, § 123.3, lists the definitions for “fish” 
and “fishery product” used in the Seafood HACCP 
Regulation.  
This guidance covers safety hazards associated 
with fish and fishery products only.  It does not 
cover most hazards associated with non-fishery 
ingredients (e.g., Salmonella enteritidis  in raw 
eggs). However, where such hazards are presented 
by a fishery product that contains non-fishery 
ingredients, control must be included in the 
HACCP plan (§ 123.6). Processors may use the 
principles included in this guidance for assistance in 
developing appropriate controls for these hazards. 
This guidance does not cover the hazard associated 
with the formation of Clostridium botulinum (C. 
botulinum) toxin in low-acid canned foods (LACFs) 
or shelf-stable acidified foods. Mandatory controls 
for this hazard are contained in the Thermally 
Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically 
Sealed Containers regulation (hereinafter referred 
to as the LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 113) and the 
Acidified Foods regulation (21 CFR 114). Such 
controls may be, but are not required to be, 
included in HACCP plans for these products.
This guidance does not cover all sanitation controls 
required by the Seafood HACCP Regulation. The 
maintenance of a sanitation monitoring program 
is an essential prerequisite to the development of 
a HACCP program. When sanitation controls are 
necessary for food safety, but are not included 
in a sanitation monitoring program, they must 
be included in the HACCP plan (21 CFR 123.6). 
However, this guidance document does contain 
recommendations only for allergen cleaning and 
sanitation, and allergen cross-contact through 
two new appendixes since normal cleaning and 
sanitation does not necessarily address allergen 
residues. 
This guidance does not describe corrective action 
or verification records, because these records 
are not required to be listed in the HACCP plan. 
Nonetheless, such records must be maintained, 
where applicable, as required in § 123.7 and § 
123.8. Additionally, this guidance does not restate 
the general requirements for records that are set 
out in § 123.9(a).
This guidance does not cover reassessment of the 
HACCP plan and/or the hazard analysis or review 
of consumer complaints, as mandated by § 123.8.
This guidance also does not provide specific 
guidance to importers of fish and fishery products 
for the development of required importer verification 
procedures. However, the information contained in 
the text, and, in particular, in Appendix 5 (“FDA and 
EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance”), 
should prove useful for this purpose. 
B.  Chapter Modifications 
The following is a summary of the most significant 
changes made to this guidance. Moving forward, 
FDA will publish this guidance as a living document 
on the FDA Seafood website (www.fda.gov/seafood). 
Until all the chapters and/or appendixes have been 
updated this guidance will continue to be identified 
as the fourth edition with the date being modified 
to reflect the most recent changes. Each chapter 
or appendix will also reference the date (month 
and year) the most recent changes were made and 
published. Chapters and appendixes that have not 
been modified will reflect the original publication 
date of April 2011. Additionally, the “Guidance for 
Industry” section will identify the specific changes 
in the header with the date of publication. You 
should carefully review the chapters applicable to 
your product and process in addition to using this 
summarized list of significant changes.
The following changes have been made throughout 
this guidance document:
G - 2 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
Chapter 1 for general information has been modified 
with the following recommendations as of April 
2011:
Chapter 2 for conducting a hazard analysis and 
developing a HACCP plan has been modified with 
the following recommendations as of April 2011:
Chapter 3 for identifying potential species-related 
and process-related hazards has been modified 
with the following recommendations as of 
August 2019:
•	 Table 3-1: Potential Species- Related Hazards 
Associated with the Actual Market Name of 
Product (from Table 3-2): 
o Escolar - “Gempylotoxin” and “Histamine” 
has been changed to “Gempylid Fish 
Poisoning” and “Scombrotoxin (Histamine).”
•	 Table 3-1: Potential Species- Related Hazards 
Associated with the Actual Market Name of 
Product (from Table 3-2):
o Puffer fish - “Pufferfish Poisoning” has been 
included in parenthesis after “Tetrodotoxin;”
•	 Table 3-1 Under Potential Species- Related 
Hazards Associated with the Actual Market 
Name of Product (from Table 3-2): 
o Spanish Mackerel - “Scombrotoxin” has 
been added with “Histamine” being placed 
in parenthesis.
•	 Potential Species- Related Hazards Associated 
with the Actual Market Name of Product  
(from Table 3-2):
o Basa - “Environmental Chemical Contam-
inants” and “Pesticides” has been changed to 
“Environmental Chemicals” and “Aquaculture 
Drugs.”
Chapter 3, Table 3-2 (“Potential Vertebrate Species-
Related Hazards”) has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 Footnote 3 has been added to the header of 
Parasites.
•	 Footnote 13 has been added to the header of 
Natural Toxins.
•	
Amberjack – S. rivoliana  has been added 
with the hazards of CFP and Scombrotoxin 
(Histamine).
•	 Amberjack or Yellowtail, aquacultured – Parasite 
hazard has been added.
•	 Amberjack or Buri, aquacultured – S eriola 
quinqueradiata has been added.
•	 Anchovy – The following changes have been 
made:
o Footnote 12 has been added to the market 
name; 
o The hazard of Parasites has been added;
•	 Mackerel, Atka - is listed under “Atka Mackerel.”
•	 Barracuda (Sphyraena spp.) – The hazard of 
CFP has been removed to align with scientific 
information. FDA has not identified all species 
of barracuda as containing ciguatoxins. 
•	
Basa or Bocourti – Footnote 8 has been 
removed.
•	 Basa or Bocourti,  aquacultured – Footnote 8 
has been removed.
•	 Bream (Acanthopagrus spp.) – Footnote 7 has 
been removed.
•	 Butterfish – Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Caparari – Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Cascarudo – Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Cisco or Tullibee (Coregonus artedi) – Footnote 
7 has been removed.
•	 Clarias Fish or Walking Clarias Fish – Footnote 
8 has been removed.
•	 Clarias fish or Walking Clarias Fish, or Claresse, 
aquacultured – The following changes have 
been made:
o Footnote 8 has been removed;
o Claresse has been added as a market name;
o Clarias gariepinus has been replaced with  
Clarias spp.
G - 3 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Cod, Morid, (Psendophycis barbata) – Footnote 
7 has been removed.
•	 Cod, aquacultured (Gadus morhua) has been 
added with the hazards of environmental 
chemicals and aquaculture drug. 
•	 Coroata – Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Corvina (Cilus gilberti) – Footnote 7 has been 
removed.
•	 Croaker or Yellowfish (Larimichthys polyactis) 
– Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Drum or Cubbyu ( Pareques umbrosus ) – 
Footnote 7 has been removed. 
•	 Drum or Lion Fish (Collichthys spp) - The market 
name “lion Fish” has been removed.
•	 Drum or Meagre  (Argyrosomus regius)  – 
Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Eel – The following changes have been made:
o Anguilla anguilla has been added with the 
hazard of Ichthyohemotoxin.
•	 Eel, aquacultured – The following changes have 
been made: 
o Anguilla anguilla – The hazard of 
Ichthyohemotoxin has been added.
o Anguilla japonica – Footnote 7 has been 
removed.
•	 Eel, Conger – The following changes have been 
made: 
o Conger conger has been added with the 
hazard of Ichthyohemotoxin:
o Conger spp. – The hazard of Parasite has 
been added.
•	 Eel, Moray
o Muraena helena has been added with the 
hazard of Ichthyohemotoxin: 
o Muraena retifera – The hazard of CFP has 
been added.  
•	 Emperor (Lethrinus spp.) – The hazard of CFP 
has been added.
•	
Flatwhiskered Fish  – Footnote 8 has been 
removed. 
•	 Flounder – Footnote 15 has been added.
•	 Flounder, aquacultured – Footnote 15 has been 
added.
•	 Flounder, aquacultured - Taxonomy change 
from Pleuronectes glacialis to Liopsetta glacialis. 
•	 Flounder or Dab – Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Flounder or Fluke ( Paralichthys flesus ) – 
Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Flounder, Arrowtooth (Atheresthes stomias) – 
Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Flounder or California Flounder (Paralichthys 
californicus) – The name has been moved to 
Flounder.
•	 Frog, aquacultured (Rana spp.) – New listing 
has been added.
•	
Gemfish (Lepidocybium flavobrunneum) – Has 
been removed from this market name.
•	 Gillbacker or Gilleybaka or Whiskerfish (Sciades 
parkeri) – The following changes have been 
made:
o The alternate market name of “Whiskerfish” 
has been added;
o Footnote 8 has been added;
o Taxonomy change from Aspistor parkeri  
to Sciades parkeri with Footnote 7 being 
added.
•	 Greenbone (Odax pullus) – Footnote 7 has been 
removed from species name.
•	 Greenland Turbot (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides) 
– The following changes have been made: 
o Has been moved to turbot; 
o The hazard of Parasites has been added.
•	 Grenadier – Footnote 7 has been removed from 
the following: Nezumia bairdii, Macruronus spp. 
Nezumia bairdii, and Trachyrhynchus spp.
•	 Grouper - Dermatolepis inermis has been added 
with the hazards of CFP and Parasite.
G - 4 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Grouper or Scamp ( Mycteroperca phenax ) 
has been added with the hazards of CFP and 
parasite.
•	 Grouper, Orange-Spotted, aquacultured 
(Epinephelus coioides) has been added with 
the hazards of environmental chemicals and 
aquaculture drug.
•	
Grouper Malabar, aquacultured ( Epinephelus 
malabaricus) has been added with the hazards 
of environmental chemicals and aquaculture 
drug. 
•	
Grouper, aquacultured (Epinephelus spp.) has 
been added with the has been added with 
the hazards of environmental chemicals and 
aquaculture drug.  
•	
Halibut or California Halibut ( Paralichthys 
californicus) has been moved to “Flounder.”
•	 Hamlet, Mutton (Alphestes afer) – Footnote 7 
has been removed.
•	 Herring – Footnote 12 has been added.
•	 Herring or Sea Herring or Sild – Footnote 12 
has been added.
•	 Herring or Sea Herring or Sild roe – Footnote 
12 has been added.
•	
Herring, Thread – Footnote 12 has been added.
•	 Jack (Seriola rivoliana) - Has been moved to 
Amberjack.
•	 Jack or Crevalle (Alectis indicus) – Footnote 7 
has been removed.
•	 Jacksmelt or Silverside  (Antherinopsis 
californiensis) – New line entry with the hazard 
of ASP has been added.
•	 Jobfish or Snapper – Footnote 8 has been added.
•	 Kingfish (Menticirrhus littoralis) – The hazard 
of ASP has been added.
•	 Ling, Mediterranean ( Molva macrophthalma) 
– Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Lionfish – New line entry with the hazard of 
CFP has been added.
•	
Mackerel (Scomber scombrus) – The hazard of 
PSP has been added.
•	 Mackerel, Spanish or Narrow-Barred – The 
market name has been modified.
•	 Mackerel, Spanish or Cero  – Cero has been 
added.
•	 Mahi-Mahi, aquacultured ( Coryphaena spp.) 
– The hazard of environmental chemicals has 
been added. 
•	
Menhaden (Brevoortia partonus) – The hazard 
has of ASP has been added.
•	 Milkfish – The hazard of Scombrotoxin 
(Histamine) has been added.
•	 Milkfish, aquacultured – The hazard of 
Scombrotoxin (Histamine) has been added.
•	 Morwong (Aplodactylus arctidens) – Footnote 
7 has been removed.
•	 Mullet (Mugil cephalus) – The following changes 
have been made:
o Footnote 7 has been removed;
o Mugil curena with the hazards of Parasites 
and ASP has been added.
•	 Nile Perch – Row added to accommodate this 
market name.
•	
Nile Perch, aquacultured – Row added to 
accommodate this market name.
•	 Oreo Dory – Footnote 12 has been added to 
market name.
•	
Pangasius, Giant – The following changes have 
been made:
o Footnote 8 has been removed;
o P. sanitwongsei  with the hazard of 
Environmental Chemicals has been added.
•	 Pangasius Shortbarbel – Footnote 8 has been 
removed.
•	 Parrotfish – The following changes have been 
made:
o Scarus spp. has been removed;
o The following with the hazard of CFP were 
added: Chlorurus gibbus, Scarus coeruleus, 
G - 5 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
S. taeniopterus, Sparisoma chrysopterum, 
S. viride.
•	 Patagonian Toothfish or Chilean Sea Bass 
(Dissostichus eleginoides)  – Footnote 7 has 
been removed. 
•	 Patagonian Toothfish or Chilean Sea Bass, 
aquacultured ( Dissostichus eleginoides ) has 
been added with the hazards of environmental 
chemicals and aquaculture drug. 
•	 Perch, Ocean or Rockfish – The following 
changes have been made:
o Rockfish has been added; 
o Footnote 8 has been added.
•	 Piramutaba or Laulao Fish – Footnote 8 has 
been removed.
•	 Pollock or Alaska Pollock – the following changes 
have been made:
o Alaska Pollock has been replaced with 
“Walleye Pollock;”
o Footnote 8 has been added;
o Taxonomy changed from Theragra chal-
cogrammus to Gadus chalcogrammus with 
Footnote 7 added.
•	 Pompano, aquacultured – New listing has been 
added.
•	 Porgy spp. (Calamus spp.) The hazard of CFP 
has been added.
•	 Puffer Fish – The following changes have been 
made:
o Puffer has been replaced with Puffer Fish;
o Footnotes 8, 11, and 16 have been added;
o Toxin acronym has changed to PFP;
o The following species are no longer 
listed Arothron spp. Legocephalus spp. 
Sphoeroides annulatus, Sphoeroides 
spengleri, Sphoeroides testudineus, and 
Tetraodon spp.
•	 Puffer Fish, aquacultured – The following 
changes have been made:
o Puffer has been replaced with Puffer Fish;
o Footnote 8, 11, and 16 have been added; 
o Toxin acronym has changed to PFP; 
o Takifugu spp . has been replaced with 
Takifugu rubripes.
•	 Roughy, Orange – Footnote 12 has been added.
•	 Roughy, Silver – Footnote 7 has been added.
•	 Sablefish, aquacultured ( Anoplopoma 
fimbria) has been added with the hazards of 
environmental chemicals and aquaculture drug. 
•	 Sardine – The following changes have been 
made:
o Footnote 12 has been added;
o The following species with the hazards of 
ASP have been added Harengula clupeola, 
H. jaguana, and Sardinops sagax.
•	
Sauger – The following changes have been 
made: 
o Atule mate has been removed;
o Sander canadensis has been added.
•	 Scad (Atule mate) – Footnote 7 has been 
removed.
•	 Sea Bream – Footnote 7 has been removed 
from species name Chrysophrys auratus.
•	
Sea Bream, aquacultured (Sparus aurata) has 
been added with the hazards of environmental 
chemicals and aquaculture drug. 
•	 Shad – The following changes have been made:
o The hazard of ASP has been added;
o Footnote 5 has been added to the hazard 
of ASP.
•	
Silverside - Atherinopsis californiensis  and 
Membras marinica with the hazard of ASP have 
been added.
•	 Skate - Amblyraja spp., Leucoraja spp., and 
Malacoraja spp. with hazard of Environmental 
Chemicals have been added.
G - 6 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Snakehead (Parachanna obscura)  - Footnote 
7 has been removed.
•	 Snapper – The following changes have been 
made:
o The hazard of CFP 14 has been added to 
Ocyurus chrysurus and Pristipomoides spp.;
o The hazard of Parasites has been added to 
Symphorus nematophorus;
o Lutjanus spp. has been replaced with the 
specific Lutjanus species names.
•	 Snapper or Schoolmaster – Lutjennus apodus 
has been added with the hazard of CFP.
•	
Snapper, aquacultured ( Lutjanus spp.) has 
been added with the hazards of environmental 
chemicals and aquaculture drug. 
•	 Sole or Flounder – Footnote 7 has been 
removed.
•	 Sole or Flounder, aquacultured – Footnote 7 
has been removed.
•	
Sorubim or Surubi – Footnote 8 has been 
removed.
•	 Spot – The hazard of ASP has been added.
•	 Sturgeon and roe (Caviar) – Caviar with 
Footnote 8 has been added. 
•	 Sturgeon and roe, (Caviar) aquacultured – 
Caviar with Footnote 8 has been added.
•	 Sunfish – “Not Mola mola”  has now been 
removed.
•	 Sutchi or Swai – The following changes have 
been made: 
o Footnote 8 has been removed;
o Taxonomy change from Pangasius hypoph-
thalmus to Pangasianodon hypophthalmus 
with Footnote 7 being added.
•	 Sutchi or Swai – The following changes have 
been made: 
o Footnote 8 has been removed;
o Taxonomy change Pangasius hypophthalmus 
to Pangasianodon hypophthalmus ; with 
Footnote 7 being added.
•	 Swordfish – The hazard of Scombrotoxin 
(Histamine) has been added.
•	 Tang – The following changes have been made:
o Ctenochaetus spp. has been replaced with 
Ctenochaetus striatus;
o Footnote 2 has been added to the hazard 
of CFP.
•	
Threadfin – Gnathanodon spp. has been 
removed.
•	 Tilapia – The hazard of Parasites has been 
added.
•	 Tilapia, aquacultured – The hazard of Parasites 
with Footnote 4 has been added. 
•	 Trevally – The following changes have been 
made:
o Caranx ignobilis , and C. melampygus  
with the hazards of CFP, Parasites, and 
Scombrotoxin (Histamine) have been added;
o The hazards associated with Gnathanodon 
speciosus have been removed.
•	 Triggerfish – The following changes have been 
made:
o Balistes spp. has been removed; 
o Balistes vetula has been added with the 
hazard of CFP.
•	 Trout, aquacultured – Taxonomy change from 
from Oncorhynchus mykiss aguabonita  to 
Oncorhynchus aguabonita  with Footnote 7 
being added.
•	 Tuna - The descriptions of “Small” and “Large” 
have been removed.
•	 Tuna, (Thunnus alalonga) – The hazard of ASP 
has been added.
•	 Turbot – Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Turbot, aquacultured – The hazard of Parasites 
with Footnote 4 has been added.
G - 7 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Unicornfish – The hazard of CFP has been 
added.
•	 Walleye  - Sander spp. has been replaced with 
Sander vitreus.
•	 Whiskered Fish – Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Whiskered Fish or Gafftopsail Fish – Footnote 
8 has been removed.
•	 Whiskered Fish or Hardhead Whiskered Fish – 
Footnote 8 has been removed.
•	 Whiting – The hazard of Parasites has been 
added.
•	 Whiting, Blue – The hazard of Parasites has 
been added.
•	
Yellowtail Amberjack, aquacultured – The 
following changes have been made:
o Footnote 7 has been removed; 
o The hazard of Parasites with Footnote 4 has 
been added.
•	 Zander – Footnote 7 has been removed.
•	 Zander, aquacultured – Footnote 7 has been 
removed.
•	
Acronym Changes – The following changes have 
been made: 
o G = Gemplytoxin has been changed to GFP 
= Gempylid Fish Poisoning;
o IHT = Ichthyohemotoxin has been added;
o T = Tetrodotoxin has been changed to PFP 
= Puffer Fish Poisoning.
•	
Footnotes – Footnotes 11, 12, 13, and 14 have 
been added.
Chapter 3, Table 3-3 (“Potential Invertebrate Species-
Related Hazards”) has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 Clam, Surf or Surfclam – The spelling of 
Mactrotoma spp. has been corrected.
•	 Crab, Beni-zuwai – New listing has been added.
•	 Crab, Golden King – The following changes 
have been made:
o Market name has changed from Crab, Brown 
King;
o Footnote 4 has been removed.
•	 Crab, Chinese Mitten – New listing has been 
added.
•	
Crab, Chinese Mitten, aquacultured – New listing 
has been added.
•	 Crab, Dungeness – The following changes have 
been made:
o Taxonomy change from Cancer magister to 
Metacarcinus magister;
o Footnote 4 has been added.
•	 Crab, Red – Footnote 4 has been removed.
•	 Crab, Santolla, Nova, or Southern Red – New 
listing has been added.
•	 Crab, Swimming, (Ovalipes punctatus) – New 
listing has been added.
•	 Cuttlefish – The hazard of Natural Toxin with 
Footnote 2 has been added.
•	
Lobster – The hazard of Natural Toxin with 
Footnote 2 has been added.
•	 Octopus – The hazard of Natural Toxin with 
Footnote 2 has been added.
•	 Octopus, Blue-Ringed (Hapalochlaena spp.) – 
New listing has been added
•	
Scallop (Euvola spp.) – Footnote 4 has been 
removed.
•	 Sea Cucumber, aquacultured – New listing has 
been added.
•	 Shrimp – Footnote 4 has been removed from 
Farfantepenaeus spp. Fenneropenaeus  spp., 
Litopenaeus spp. Marsupenaeus spp., and 
Melicertus spp.
•	 Shrimp or Prawn – Taxonomy change from 
Hymenopenaeus sibogae  to Haliporoides 
sibogae.
•	 Squid or Calamari – Market name has been 
updated to add “Calamari.” 
G - 8 (March 2020)). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Squid (Dosidicus gigas) – The hazard of Natural 
Toxin with Footnote 2 has been added.
•	 Squid (Loligo media) – Footnote 4 has been 
removed.
•	 Whelk or Sea Snail (Zidona dufresnei) – New 
listing has been added.
Chapter 3, Table 3-4 (“Potential Process-Related 
Hazards”) has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 Footnote 2 has been removed.
•	 Footnotes 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 have been 
renumbered as a result of footnote 2 being 
removed.
•	 Header – Allergens and Food Intolerance 
Substances – Chapter 19 – The following 
changes have been made:
o Chapter title updated to remove “Prohibited 
Food and Color Additives;”
o Footnote 5 has been added to the header.
•	 Smoked Fish (Other than ROP) – New listing 
for Chap 16 with Footnote 6 has been added.
•	
Dried Fish (All) - Footnote 7 for Chapter 13 
has been added.
•	 Battered or Breaded Finished Product Food – 
The following changes have been made:
o “Package Type” has been divided into two 
types;
o New listing for Chapter 13 for the ROP 
Package Type has been added.
•	 Raw oysters, clams, and mussels (ROP) – The 
following changes have been made:
o “Hot Fill” and “Steam Flush” has been 
removed from the Package Type description;
o The hazard of undeclared allergen has been 
removed.
•	 Raw oysters, clams, and mussels (other than 
ROP) – The following changes have been made:
o “Hot Fill” and “Steam Flush” has been 
removed from the Package Type description;
o The hazard of undeclared allergen has been 
removed.
•	 Footnotes – Footnotes 5, and 6 have been 
added.
Chapter 4 for the control of pathogens from the 
harvest area has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of April 2011: 
•	 Hydrostatic pressure, individual quick freezing 
(IQF) with extended storage, and irradiation are 
now identified as processes that are designed 
to retain raw product characteristics and that 
can be used to reduce Vibrio vulnificus (V. 
vulnificus) and Vibrio parahaemolyticus (V. 
parahaemolyticus) to non-detectable levels;
•	 It is now recognized that a tag on a container of 
shellstock (in-shell molluscan shellfish) received 
from another dealer need not identify the 
harvester;
•	 Critical limits relating to control of pathogen 
growth prior to receipt of raw molluscan shellfish 
by the primary processor are now linked to 
monitoring the time that the shellfish are 
exposed to air (i.e., by harvest or receding 
tide) rather than to the time that the shellfish 
are harvested;
•	
Reference is now made to the role of the Federal, 
state, tribal, territorial and foreign government 
shellfish control authorities in determining 
whether the hazard of V. parahaemolyticus  
is reasonably likely to occur in raw molluscan 
shellfish and in the development of a V. 
parahaemolyticus control plan that will dictate, 
at least to some extent, the nature of the 
controls for this pathogen in HACCP plans;
•	 The control strategy examples are restructured 
for improved clarity: one for source controls 
(e.g., tagging, labeling, source waters, harvester 
licensure, and raw consumption advisory) and 
a second for time from harvest to refrigeration 
controls.
Chapter 5 for the control of parasites has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011:
•	 It is now recognized that the parasite hazard 
may be reasonably likely to occur in fish raised 
in freshwater containing larvae of pathogenic 
G - 9 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
liver, lung and intestinal flukes because these 
parasites enter the fish through the skin rather 
than in the food.
Chapter 6 for the control of natural toxins has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of August 2019:
•	 The information in the Chapter has been 
reorganized into two categories in each section. 
o “Fish other than molluscan shellfish” and
o “Molluscan Shellfish.”
•	 Natural Toxin Detection Section was removed. 
This information is utilized to confirm illnesses/
outbreaks, inform advisories for at risk harvest 
areas, and/or make a determination for harvest 
area closures. This information was never 
intended for a processor to include in the HACCP 
plan as a control measure. The information has 
been relocated to Appendix 5.
•	 Ciguatera Fish Poisoning (CFP) – The following 
changes have been made: 
o Additional locations were included based on 
scientific discovery of the toxin;
o Areas included are Florida, Hawaii, and 
Puerto Rico;
o Addition of finfish to contain CFP – lionfish, 
mackerel and tang;
o Finfish previously listed in Chapter 3 are 
now included in Chapter 6.
•	 Tetrodotoxin – Symptomology development has 
been updated to align with the Bad Bug Book.
•	 Natural Toxins addition – The following changes 
have been made: 
o Clupeotoxin has been added as a natural 
toxin with associated information;
o Ichthyohemotoxin has been added as a 
natural toxin with associated information; 
o Seafood-associated rhabdomyolysis (some-
times referred to as Haff disease) has been 
added as a natural toxin with associated 
information.
•	 A “Note” was added to the chapter regarding 
venomous fish. This was to correspond to the 
Bad Bug Book’s  new chapter to address the 
potential concern and FDA’s thoughts.
•	
Amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP) – Additional 
species of lobster, sardine, white mullet, 
menhaden, and predatory species, such as 
Florida pompano, Gulf Kingfish and spot, were 
included.
•	 Diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP) – Addition 
locations for the toxin were included such as 
Puget Sound and the west coast of Canada, 
Texas, Washington State, Alabama, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, and New York.
•	 Paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) – The 
following additions were made: 
o Molluscan shellfish examples of clams, 
cockles, mussels, oysters, and scallops;
o Information regarding retention of the toxin 
and depuration;
o Expanded the information regarding 
gastropod accumulation of the toxin;
o Addition of finfish species where the toxin 
has been found in the viscera such as 
mackerel, Dungeness crab, tanner crab 
and red rock crab.
•	 Natural Toxin Control Section – The following 
changes have been made: in the Natural Toxin 
Control Section:
o ASP and PSP in fish other than molluscan 
shellfish – An example was added of 
the adductor muscle from the scallop to 
eliminate the toxin;
o Molluscan Shellfish – The statement: “States 
must have a Biotoxin Contingency Plan” 
was added.
•	 Control Strategy Example 1 – Source control 
for fish other than molluscan shellfish – The 
following changes have been made:
o Critical Limit – “ASP for consumption 
advisory” was added;
o Establish Verification procedures – “Periodic 
verification of harvest locations” was added.
G - 10 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Control Strategy Example 2 – Harvest Area for 
Molluscan Shellfish – The following changes 
have been made: 
o Critical Limit – 
	 Update made to align with the NSSP and 
regulations for shellfish and HACCP, and 
	 A note was added regarding dockside 
screening to align with NSSP;
o Monitoring Procedures – 
	 Update made to include information 
that would be required for monitoring 
as identified though the regulation and 
NSSP;
•	 Bibliography was updated to reflect the additions 
throughout the chapter.
 Chapter 7 for the control of scombrotoxin 
(histamine) formation has been modified with 
the following recommendations as of April 2011: 
•	 Information is now provided about the potential 
for scombrotoxin (histamine) formation in 
products like tuna salad that have been allowed 
to become recontaminated and then subjected 
to time and temperature abuse;
•	 The recommendations regarding on-board 
chilling of scombrotoxin-forming species of 
fish are now listed as follows:
o Fish exposed to air or water temperatures 
above 83°F (28.3°C) should be placed in 
ice, or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, 
or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon as 
possible during harvest, but not more than 
6 hours from the time of death, or
o Fish exposed to air and water temperatures 
of 83°F (28.3°C) or less should be placed in 
ice, or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, 
or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon as 
possible during harvest, but not more than 
9 hours from the time of death, or
o Fish that are gilled and gutted before chilling 
should be placed in ice, or in refrigerated 
seawater, ice slurry, or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) 
or less, as soon as possible during harvest, 
but not more than 12 hours from the time 
of death, or 
o Fish that are harvested under conditions 
that expose dead fish to harvest waters 
of 65 °F (18.3 °C) or less for 24 hours or 
less should be placed in ice, refrigerated 
seawater, ice slurry, or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) 
or less, as soon as possible after harvest, 
but not more than the time limits listed 
above, with the time period starting when 
the fish leave the 65 °F (18.3°C) or less 
environment;
•	 Cautions are now provided that handling 
practices and processing controls that are 
recommended as suitable for preventing the 
formation of scombrotoxin may not be sufficient 
to prevent fish from suffering quality or shelf-life 
degradation (i.e., decomposition) in a way that 
may otherwise render it adulterated under the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act;
•	 The lower anterior portion of the loin is now 
identified as the best place to collect a sample 
from large fish for histamine analysis;
•	 Fermenting, pickling, smoking, and drying are 
now identified as likely critical control points 
(CCPs) for this hazard;
•	
When fish are checked for internal temperature 
at off-loading, it is now recommended that: 
o For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel and off-loaded from the 
vessel by the processor 24 or more hours 
after death, the internal temperature should 
be 40°F (4.4°C) or below,
OR
o For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel and off-loaded from the 
vessel by the processor from 15 to less 
than 24 hours after death, the internal 
temperature should be 50°F (10°C) or 
below,
OR
o For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel and off-loaded from the 
vessel by the processor from 12 to less 
than 15 hours after death, the internal 
temperature should be 60°F (15.6°C) or 
below;
•	 The recommended level at which a lot should 
be rejected based on sensory examination when 
G - 11 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
118 fish are examined is now corrected to be 
no more than 2 fish to coincide with the goal 
of less than 2.5% decomposition in the lot;
•	
It is now recommended that the number of fish 
subjected to sensory examination be increased 
if there is likely to be greater than normal 
variability in the lot, and that only one species 
constitute a lot for sampling purposes;
•	 When histamine analysis is performed as a 
corrective action, it is now recommended 
that any fish found to exceed the internal 
temperature at receiving critical limit be 
included in the sample;
•	 When the sensory critical limit has not been 
met, it is now recommended that the processor 
perform histamine analysis of a minimum of 60 
fish, collected representatively from throughout 
the lot, including all fish in the lot that show 
evidence of decomposition, and reject the lot 
if any fish are found with a histamine level 
greater than or equal to 50 ppm;
•	 Subdividing and retesting for histamine is no 
longer recommended after an initial failed 
histamine test;  
•	 It is now recommended that employees who 
conduct sensory screening receive adequate 
training;
•	
It is now recommended that for shipments 
of scombrotoxin-forming species received 
under ice on open-bed trucks be checked for 
both sufficiency of ice and internal product 
temperature;
•	 It is now recommended that shipments of 
scombrotoxin-forming species received under 
gel packs be checked for both adequacy of gel 
packs and internal product temperature;
•	 It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of fish is checked at receipt by a 
secondary processor because the transit time 
is no more than 4 hours, calculation of transit 
time should include all time outside a controlled 
temperature environment;
•	 It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of fish is checked at receipt by a 
secondary processor because the transit time is 
no more than 4 hours, a temperature-indicating 
device (e.g., a thermometer) should be used 
to determine internal product temperatures in 
a minimum of 12 fish, unless there are fewer 
than 12 fish in a lot, in which case all of the 
fish should be measured;
•	
When checks of the sufficiency of ice or chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs, or internal 
product temperatures are used at receipt of fish 
from another processor, it is now recommended 
that the number of containers examined and 
the number of containers in the lot be recorded;
•	 Control of scombrotoxin (histamine) formation 
during processing and storage are now provided 
as separate control strategy examples, and 
examples of HACCP plans are now provided 
for both strategies;
•	
The extended exposure times during processing 
(more than 12 hours, cumulatively, if any 
portion of that time is at temperatures above 
70°F (21.1°C); or more than 24 hours, 
cumulatively, as long as no portion of that 
time is at temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C)) 
previously recommended for fish that have been 
previously frozen are now also recommended 
for fish that have been previously heat treated 
sufficiently to destroy scombrotoxin-forming 
bacteria and are subsequently handled in a 
manner where there is an opportunity for 
recontamination with scombrotoxin-forming 
bacteria;     
•	 It is now acknowledged that it may be possible 
to control scombrotoxin formation during 
unrefrigerated processing using a critical 
limit that is time of exposure only (i.e., no 
temperature component), if it is developed with 
an assumption that worst-case temperatures 
(e.g., in excess of 70°F (21.1°C)) may occur; 
•	
Chemical coolants (e.g., gel packs) are no 
longer recommended for control of temperature 
during in-plant storage;
•	 For control of time and temperature during 
refrigerated storage, it is now noted that 
critical limits that specify a cumulative time 
and temperature of exposure to temperatures 
above 40°F (4.4°C) are not ordinarily suitable 
because of the difficulty in determining when 
specific products have entered and left the 
cooler and the time and temperature exposures 
to which they were subjected.  However, there 
may be circumstances where this approach is 
suitable.  It is also noted that minor variations 
in cooler temperature measurements can be 
G - 12 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
avoided by submerging the sensor for the 
temperature-recording device in a liquid that 
mimics the characteristics of the product;
•	 High-temperature alarms are no longer 
recommended for monitoring temperatures in 
coolers or processing areas;
•	
When the adequacy of ice is established as the 
critical limit for refrigerated storage, it is now 
recommended that monitoring be performed 
with sufficient frequency to ensure control 
rather than at least twice per day.
Chapter 8 related to other decomposition-related 
hazards has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 It is now noted that FDA has received consumer 
complaints concerning illnesses associated 
with the consumption of decomposed salmon, 
attributable to the production in the fish of 
toxins other than histamine (e.g., biogenic 
amines, such as putrescine and cadaverine); 
•	 It is now noted that there are also some 
indications that chemicals formed when fats 
and oils in foods oxidize may contribute to 
long-term detrimental health effects.
Chapter 9 for the control of environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides has been modified 
with the following recommendations as of April 
2011: 
•	 Toxic element guidance levels for arsenic, 
cadmium, lead, and nickel are no longer listed;
•	 Tolerance levels for endothall and its 
monomethyl ester in fish and carbaryl in oysters 
are now listed;
•	 The collection of soil samples from aquaculture 
production sites is no longer listed as a 
preventive measure;
•	 An example of a HACCP plan is now provided for 
control of environmental chemical contaminants 
in molluscan shellfish;
•	 When testing for environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides is used as the 
control measure, it is now recommended that 
the adequacy of the testing methods and 
equipment be verified periodically (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained using 
an Association of Official Analytical Chemists 
(AOAC) or equivalent method, or by analyzing 
proficiency samples).
Chapter 10, which covers the control of 
methylmercury, has been rewritten to 
acknowledge that FDA is receiving comments 
on a draft quantitative risk assessment 
for methylmercury, which may result in 
a reassessment of its risk management 
strategies has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011:
Chapter 11 for the control of aquaculture 
drugs has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011: 
•	 The potential for this hazard to occur during 
transportation of live fish is now recognized, 
and recommended controls are provided;
•	 An explanation of extra-label use of drugs is 
now provided, and a list of drugs prohibited for 
extra-label use is now listed;
•	 FDA high enforcement priority aquaculture 
drugs are now listed;
•	 Aquaflor® Type A Medicated Article (florfenicol) 
is now listed as an approved drug for catfish 
and salmonids;
•	
Aquaflor® CA1 is now listed as an approved 
drug for catfish or in fingerling to food fish as 
the sole ration for 10 consecutive days.
•	 35% PEROX-AID
® (hydrogen peroxide) is now 
listed as an approved drug for freshwater-reared 
salmonids and freshwater-reared cool water 
finfish and channel catfish;
•	 Terramycin® 200 for Fish (oxytetracycline 
dihydrate) Type C, is now listed as an approved 
drug for catfish, salmonids; and lobster;
•	 OxyMarine , Oxytetracycline HCl Soluble 
Powder-343, Terramycin-343, TETROXY Aquatic 
is now listed as an approved drug for all finfish 
fry and fingerlings as an aid in identification;
•	 Quarterly raw material, in-process, or finished 
product testing is now recommended as a 
verification step for control strategies involving 
review of suppliers’ certificates at receipt of 
G - 13 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
raw materials, review of records of drug use 
at receipt of raw materials, and on-farm visits;
•	 When testing for aquaculture drugs is used as 
the control measure, it is now recommended 
that the adequacy of the testing methods and 
equipment be verified periodically (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained using an 
AOAC or equivalent method, or by analyzing 
proficiency samples).
Chapter 12 for the control of pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation (other than C. 
botulinum) as a result of time and temperature 
abuse has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 It is now recognized that V. vulnificus , V. 
parahaemolyticus, and Vibrio cholarae non-O1 
and non-0139 are generally associated with 
marine and estuarine species of fish and may 
not be reasonably likely to occur in freshwater 
species or non-fishery ingredients, unless they 
have been cross-contaminated;
•	 It is now clarified that products that are partially 
cooked to set the batter or breading or stabilize 
the product shape (e.g., fish balls, shrimp 
egg rolls, and breaded fish portions) are not 
considered to be ready to eat;
•	
Information is now provided on the 
determination of CCPs for products that are a 
combination of raw, ready-to-eat and cooked, 
ready-to-eat fishery ingredients;
•	
Control of time and temperature abuse at 
receipt, during cooling after cooking, during 
unrefrigerated processing, and during 
refrigerated storage and processing are now 
provided as four separate control strategy 
examples.  Examples of HACCP plans are now 
provided for all four strategies;
•	 For control of transit conditions at receipt of 
ready-to-eat fish or fishery products delivered 
refrigerated (not frozen), it is now recommended 
that all lots be accompanied by transportation 
records that show that the fish were held at or 
below an ambient or internal temperature of 
40°F (4.4°C) throughout transit or, for transit 
times of 4 hours or less, that the internal 
temperature of the fish at time of receipt was 
at or below 40°F (4.4°C);
•	
For control of time and temperature during 
refrigerated storage and refrigerated processing, 
it is now noted that critical limits that specify a 
cumulative time and temperature of exposure 
to temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) are not 
ordinarily suitable because of the difficulty 
in determining when specific products have 
entered and left the cooler and the time 
and temperature exposures to which they 
were subjected.  However, there may be 
circumstances where this approach is suitable.  
It is also noted that minor variations in cooler 
temperature measurements can be avoided by 
submerging the sensor for the temperature-
recording device in a liquid that mimics the 
characteristics of the product;
•	
It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of the fishery product is checked 
at receipt, because the transit time is no more 
than 4 hours, calculation of transit time should 
include all time outside a controlled temperature 
environment;
•	 It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of product is checked at receipt 
by a secondary processor because the transit 
time is no more than 4 hours, a temperature-
indicating device (e.g., a thermometer) 
should be used to determine internal product 
temperatures in a minimum of 12 containers 
(e.g., cartons and totes), unless there are fewer 
than 12 containers in a lot, in which case all of 
the containers should be measured;
•	 When checks of the sufficiency of ice or chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs, or internal 
product temperatures are used at receipt of fish 
from another processor, it is now recommended 
that the number of containers examined and 
the number of containers in the lot be recorded;
•	 Chemical coolants (e.g., gel packs) are no 
longer recommended for control of temperature 
during in-plant storage;
•	 Recommended cumulative exposure times and 
temperatures (i.e., critical limits) are now listed 
as follows: 
For raw, ready-to-eat products:
o If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C), 
exposure time (i.e., time at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but below 
G - 14 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited to 2 
hours (3 hours if Staphylococcus aureus (S. 
aureus) is the only pathogen of concern),
OR
o Alternatively, exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited 
to 4 hours, as long as no more than 2 of 
those hours are between 70°F (21.1°C) and 
135ºF (57.2ºC),
OR
o If the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C), but never 
above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
should be limited to 5 hours (12 hours if S. 
aureus is the only pathogen of concern),
OR
o The product is held at internal temperatures 
below 50°F (10°C),
OR
o Alternatively, the product is held at ambient 
air temperatures below 50°F (10°C) 
throughout processing;
For cooked, ready-to-eat products:
o If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 80°F (27.2°C), 
exposure time (i.e., time at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but below 
135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited to 1 hour 
(3 hours if S. aureus is the only pathogen 
of concern),
OR
o Alternatively, if at any time the product is 
held at internal temperatures above 80°F 
(26.7°C), exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited 
to 4 hours, as long as no more than 1 of 
those hours is above 70°F (21.1°C),
OR
o If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C), but 
never above 80°F (26.7°C), exposure time 
at internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
should be limited to 2 hours (3 hours if S. 
aureus is the only pathogen of concern),
OR
o Alternatively, if the product is never held at 
internal temperatures above 80°F (26.7°C), 
exposure times at internal temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C) should be limited to 4 
hours, as long as no more than 2 of those 
hours are above 70°F (21.1°C),
OR
o If the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C), but never 
above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
should be limited to 5 hours (12 hours if S. 
aureus is the only pathogen of concern), 
OR
o The product is held at internal temperatures 
below 50°F (10°C),
OR
o Alternatively, the product is held at ambient 
air temperatures below 50°F (10°C) 
throughout processing;
•	 High-temperature alarms are no longer 
recommended for monitoring temperatures in 
coolers or processing areas;
•	 When the adequacy of ice is established as the 
critical limit for refrigerated storage, it is now 
recommended that monitoring be performed 
with sufficient frequency to ensure control 
rather than at least twice per day;
•	 It is now recommended that monitoring 
shipments received under gel packs include 
both adequacy of gel packs and internal product 
temperature.
Chapter 13 for the control of C. botulinum  toxin 
formation has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 Information is now provided on Time-
Temperature Indicator (TTI) performance and 
suitability;
G - 15 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 A control strategy is now provided for application 
of TTIs on each of the smallest package units 
(i.e., the unit of packaging that will not be 
distributed any further, usually consumer or 
end-user package), where refrigeration is the 
sole barrier to prevent toxin formation;
•	
It is no longer recommended that consideration 
be given to whether the finished product will be 
stored and distributed frozen when determining 
whether the hazard is significant.  A control 
strategy is now provided to ensure that frozen 
products are properly labeled when freezing 
is the sole barrier to prevent toxin formation;
•	 Processors are now advised to take particular 
care in determining the safety of a packaging 
material for a product in which (1) the spoilage 
organisms have been eliminated or significantly 
reduced by such processes as high-pressure 
processing and (2) refrigeration is the sole 
barrier to toxin formation.  The generally 
recommended 10,000 cc/m2/24 hours at 24ºC 
oxygen transmission rates may not be suitable 
in this case;
•	 High-temperature alarms are no longer 
recommended for monitoring temperatures in 
coolers or processing areas;
•	
Chemical coolants (e.g., gel packs) are no 
longer recommended for control of temperature 
during in-plant storage;
•	 When the adequacy of ice is established as the 
critical limit for refrigerated storage, it is now 
recommended that monitoring be performed 
with sufficient frequency to ensure control 
rather than at least twice per day;
•	 It is now recommended that a water phase 
salt level of 20% be achieved in shelf-stable, 
reduced oxygen packaged products in which 
salt is the only barrier to pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation; 
•	
It is now recommended that monitoring 
shipments received under gel packs include 
both adequacy of gel packs and internal product 
temperature;
•	 It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of the fishery product is checked 
at receipt, because the transit time is no more 
than 4 hours, calculation of transit time should 
include all time outside a controlled temperature 
environment;
•	 It is now recommended that if only the internal 
temperature of product is checked at receipt 
by a secondary processor because the transit 
time is no more than 4 hours, a temperature-
indicating device (e.g., a thermometer) 
should be used to determine internal product 
temperatures in a minimum of 12 containers 
(e.g., cartons and totes), unless there are fewer 
than 12 containers in a lot, in which case all of 
the containers should be measured;
•	 A control strategy example is now provided for 
receipt by a secondary processor of refrigerated 
reduced oxygen packaged products that may 
be stored and further distributed or used as an 
ingredient for further processing;
•	 It is now clarified that brining time should be 
monitored during the processing of smoked fish;
•	 It is now recommended that brine be treated 
to minimize microbial contamination or be 
periodically replaced as a good manufacturing 
practice control.
Chapter 14 for the control of pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation as a result of 
inadequate drying has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 It is no longer recommended that consideration 
be given to whether the finished product will 
be stored and distributed frozen (in the case 
of reduced oxygen packaged products) or 
refrigerated (in the case of aerobically packaged 
products) when determining whether the hazard 
is significant.  A control strategy to ensure that 
refrigerated dried products are properly labeled 
when refrigeration is the sole barrier to toxin 
formation is now provided.  A control strategy 
to ensure that frozen products are properly 
labeled when freezing is the sole barrier to 
toxin formation is now provided in Chapter 13.  
Chapter 15 for the control of S. aureus toxin 
formation in hydrated batter mixes has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011:
•	 The number of S. aureus organisms normally 
needed to produce toxin is now listed as 
500,000 to 1,000,000 per gram;
G - 16 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 High-temperature alarms are no longer 
recommended for monitoring temperatures in 
processing areas.
Chapter 16 for the control of pathogenic bacteria 
survival through cooking has been modified with 
the following recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 The separate chapters that previously covered 
pathogen survival through cooking and 
pathogen survival through pasteurization are 
now combined;
•	
Pasteurization is now defined as a heat 
treatment applied to eliminate the most 
resistant pathogen of public health concern 
that is reasonably likely to be present in food;  
•	 Information is now provided for an option to 
monitor End-Point Internal Product Temperature, 
instead of continuous time and temperature 
monitoring during cooking or pasteurization, 
when a scientific study has been conducted to 
validate that it will provide a 6D process for 
the target pathogen;
•	 For surimi-based products, soups, or sauces, 
the following pasteurization process is now 
recommended:  a minimum cumulative, total 
lethality of F194°F (F90°C) = 10 minutes, where z = 
12.6°F (7°C) for temperatures less than 194°F 
(90°C), and z = 18°F (10°C) for temperatures 
above 194°F (90°C);
•	 For Dungeness crabmeat, the following 
pasteurization process is now recommended: 
a minimum cumulative total lethality of F
194°F 
(F90°C) = 57 minutes, where z = 15.5°F (8.6°C);
•	 Information concerning levels of Listeria 
monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes) in foods 
is now updated based on the final FDA/U.S. 
Department of Agriculture L. monocytogenes 
risk assessment.
Chapter 17 is a new chapter that contains guidance 
for the control of pathogen survival through 
processes designed to retain raw product 
characteristics, including high hydrostatic 
pressure processing, mild heat processing, IQF 
with extended frozen storage, and irradiation.  
At present, the chapter applies exclusively to 
the processing of molluscan shellfish products 
for which there is a desire to retain raw product 
characteristics.  However, these technologies 
may have other applications as well has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011:
Chapter 18 for the control of the introduction of 
pathogenic bacteria after pasteurization and 
specialized cooking processes has been modified 
with the following recommendations as of April 
2011: 
•	 It is no longer recommended that consideration 
be given to whether the finished product will be 
stored and distributed frozen when determining 
whether the hazard is significant.  A control 
strategy to ensure that frozen products are 
properly labeled when freezing is the sole 
barrier to prevent C. botulinum toxin formation 
is now provided in Chapter 13.
Chapter 19 for the control of undeclared food 
allergens and intolerance substances has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of August 2019:
•	 The language regarding allergen cross-
contact has been enhanced.
•	 The language regarding allergen sanitation 
and cleaning has been enhanced.
•	 The examples have been consolidated for 
relevance.
•	 Unnecessary examples have been removed.
•	 “Prohibited additives” has been removed 
from the title and chapter since they are 
prohibited.
•	 Label review for the appropriate identification 
of the allergen and being applied to the 
appropriate product has been added.
•	 CFR and other regulatory references have 
been removed. 
Chapter 20 for the control of metal inclusion has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011:
•	 Foreign objects less than 0.3 inch (7 mm) are 
now identified as having a potential for causing 
trauma or serious injury to persons in special 
risk groups, such as infants, surgery patients, 
and the elderly;
G - 17 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
•	 Additional information on calibration and 
validation of electronic metal detectors is now 
provided;
•	 Wire mesh baskets are no longer used as 
an example of an unlikely source of metal 
fragments;
•	 The recommended critical limit for the metal 
detection or separation control strategy has 
been expanded to read, “All product passes 
through an operating metal detection or 
separation device,” and “No detectable metal 
fragments in a product passing through the 
metal detection or separation device.”  As a 
result, the recommended monitoring procedures 
are also expanded so that they now are designed 
to also ensure that the processes are in place 
and operating;
•	
It is now recommended that when metal 
fragments are found in a product by a metal 
detector or separated from the product stream 
by magnets, screens, or other devices, the 
source of the fragment is located and corrected.
Chapter 21 for the control of glass inclusion has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011:
•	 This chapter is no longer identified as a draft;
•	 The use of x-ray detection devices is no 
longer recommended as a reliable method for 
controlling glass inclusion;
•	 The recommended critical limit for the glass 
container cleaning and visual inspection 
control strategy has been expanded to read, 
“All container pass through an operating glass 
container inspection or cleaning process,” 
and “No detectable glass fragments in glass 
containers passing the CCP.” As a result, the 
recommended monitoring procedures are also 
expanded so that they now are designed to 
also ensure that the processes are in place 
and operating;
•	 The monitoring procedures for the glass 
container cleaning and visual inspection control 
strategy now include a recommendation that 
a representative sample of the cleaned or 
inspected containers be examined at the start 
of processing, every 4 hours during processing, 
at the end of processing, and after any 
breakdowns;
•	 It is now recommended that monitoring for 
the presence of glass be performed at the 
start of each production day and after each 
shift change.
•	 It is now recommended that a representative 
sample of cleaned or inspected glass containers 
be examined daily, at the start of processing, 
every 4 hours during processing, at the end of 
processing, and after any breakdowns.
Appendix 1: “Forms” has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of April 2011: 
Appendix 2: “Sample Product Flow Diagram” 
has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011: 
Appendix 3: “Critical Control Point Decision 
Tree” has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of April 2011: 
Appendix 4: “Bacterial Pathogen Growth and 
Inactivation,” has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of April 2011:
•	 Recommended summary cumulative exposure 
times and temperatures are now listed as 
described above for Chapter 12;
•	 The maximum water phase salt level for growth 
of Campylobacter jejuni is now listed as 1.7%;
•	 The maximum level of acidity (pH) for growth 
of pathogenic strains of Escherichia coli (E. coli) 
is now listed as 10;
•	 The maximum recommended cumulative 
exposure times for Bacillus cereus are now listed 
as follows: 5 days at temperatures of 39.2 to 
43°F (4 to 6°C); 1 day at temperatures of 44 
to 59°F (7 to 15°C); 6 hours at temperatures 
of 60 to 70°F (16 to 21°C); and 3 hours at 
temperatures above 70°F (21°C);
•	 The maximum cumulative exposure times for 
E. coli, Salmonella, and Shigella spp. are now 
listed as follows: 2 days for temperatures from 
their minimum growth temperature 41.4 to 50°F 
(10°C); 5 hours for temperatures of 51 to 70°F 
(11 to 21°C); and 2 hours for temperatures 
above 70°F (21°C);
•	
The maximum cumulative exposure times 
for Listeria monocytogenes are now listed as 
G - 18 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
follows:  7 days for temperatures of 31.3 to 
41ºF (-0.4 to 5ºC); 1 day for temperatures of 42 
to 50°F (6 to 10°C); 7 hours for temperatures 
of 51 to 70°F (11 to 21°C); 3 hours for 
temperatures of 71 to 86°F (22  to 30°C); and 
1 hour for temperatures above 86°F (30°C);
•	 The maximum cumulative exposure times 
for Vibrio cholerae , V. vulnificus, and V. 
parahaemolyticus are now listed as follows:  
21 days for temperatures from their minimum 
growth temperature to 50°F (10°C); 6 hours 
for temperatures of 51 to 70°F (11 to 21°C);  
2 hours at temperatures of 71 to 80°F (22 to 
26.7°C); and 1 hour at temperatures above 
80°F (26.7°C), with the last temperature range 
applying only to cooked, ready-to-eat products.
Appendix 5: Table A-5, “FDA and EPA Safety Levels in 
Regulations and Guidance,” has been modified 
with the following recommendations as of 
March 2020:
•	 Biological Safety Levels – The < sign has been 
changed to ≥ for: 
o Post-harvest processed clams, mussels, 
oysters, and whole and roe-on scallops, 
fresh or frozen, that make a label claim of 
“process to reduce Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
to non-detectable levels”
o Post-harvest processed clams, mussels, 
oysters, and whole and roe-on scallops, 
fresh or frozen, that make a label claim of 
“process to reduce Vibrio vulnificus to non-
detectable levels” 
•	 Chemical Safety Levels – The ≥ sign has been 
changed to > for the following: 
o 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D);
o Bispyribac-sodium;
o Carbaryl;
o Carfentrazone-ethyl;
o Diquat; 
o Diuron and its metabolites; 
o Endothall and its monomethyl ester;
o Ethoxyquin;
o Flumioxazin;
o Fluridone;
o Fluxapyroxad; 
o Florpyrauxifen-benzyl;
o Glyphosate; 
o Imazapyr;
o Penoxsulam;
o Saflufenacil;
o Spinosad;
o Triclopyr and its metabolites and degradates; 
and 
o Topramezone.
Appendix 6 no longer lists food allergens.  It now 
contains a table of Japanese and Hawaiian 
vernacular names and their corresponding 
U.S. market names has been modified with the 
following recommendations as of April 2011: 
Appendix 7 no longer lists the bibliography.  It now 
contains information regarding the public health 
impacts of bacterial and viral pathogens of 
greatest concern in seafood processing has been 
modified with the following recommendations 
as of April 2011: 
Appendix 8: “Procedures for Safe and Sanitary 
Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery 
Products” has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 Part 123 has been updated to include 21 CFR 
Part 117.
•	 Part 1240 has been updated to include “d.” 
Appendix 9 – “Allergen Cleaning and Sanitation” 
has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 New appendix with recommendations for 
establishing an allergen cleaning and sanitation 
program has been added.  
G - 19 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
Appendix 10 – “Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention” 
has been modified with the following 
recommendations as of August 2019:
•	 New appendix with recommendations for 
establishing controls to prevent cross-contact 
in a facility has been added.  
G - 20 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
NOTES:
G - 21 (March 2020). 
Guidance for the Industry: Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Controls Guidance, Fourth Edition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1: General Information 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
THE GUIDANCE 
This is the fourth edition of the Food and Drug 
Administration’s (FDA’s) “Fish and Fishery Products 
Hazards and Controls Guidance.” This guidance 
relates to FDA’s Fish and Fishery Products 
regulation (called the Seafood HACCP Regulation, 
21 CFR 123, in this guidance document) and the 
Control of Communicable Diseases regulation, 
21 CFR 1240, that require processors of fish 
and fishery products to develop and implement 
HACCP systems for their operations. Those final 
regulations were published in the Federal Register 
on December 18, 1995, and became effective on 
December 18, 1997. The codified portion of the 
regulations is included in Appendix 8. 
This guidance is being issued as a companion 
document to “HACCP: Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point Training Curriculum,” which was 
developed by the Seafood HACCP Alliance 
for Training and Education. The Alliance is an 
organization of federal and state regulators, 
including FDA, academia, and the seafood 
industry. FDA recommends that processors of 
fish and fishery products use the two documents 
together in the development of a HACCP system. 
This guidance document will be maintained on 
the FDA.GOV website, which should be consulted 
for subsequent updates. 
Copies of the training document may be 
purchased from: 
Florida Sea Grant  
IFAS - Extension Bookstore  
University of Florida  
P.O. Box 110011  
Gainesville, FL 32611-0011  
(800) 226-1764 
Or 
www.ifasbooks.com 
Or you may download a copy from: 
http://www.fda.gov/FoodGuidances 
CHAPTER 1: General Information 
19 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 1: General Information 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
THE HACCP PLAN FORM 
This guidance document is designed to walk 
you through a series of 18 steps that will yield a 
completed Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) plan. A blank HACCP Plan Form is 
contained in Appendix 1. Note that this is a two-
page form, with the second page to be used if 
your process has more critical control points than 
can be listed on one page. The Procedures for 
the Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing 
of Fish and Fishery Products regulation, 21 CFR 
123 (hereinafter, the Seafood HACCP Regulation), 
requires that you prepare a HACCP plan for fish 
and fishery products that you process if there are 
significant food safety hazards associated with the 
products. The regulation does not require that you 
use the form included in Appendix 1. However, 
using this standardized form may help you develop 
an acceptable plan and will expedite regulatory 
review. A separate HACCP plan should be 
developed for each location where fish and fishery 
products are processed and for each kind of fish 
and fishery product processed at that location. You 
may group products together in a single HACCP 
plan if the food safety hazards and controls are the 
same for all products in the group. 
THE HAZARD ANALYSIS WORKSHEET 
In order to complete the HACCP Plan Form, 
you will need to perform a process called 
hazard analysis. The Seafood HACCP Regulation 
requires that all seafood processors conduct, 
or have conducted for them, a hazard analysis 
to determine whether there are food safety 
hazards that are reasonably likely to occur in 
their product and to the preventive measures that 
a processor can apply to control those hazards 
(21 CFR 123.6(a)). FDA has found that the use 
of a standardized Hazard Analysis Worksheet 
assists with this process. A blank Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet is contained in Appendix 1. Note that 
this is also a two-page form, with the second page 
to be used if your process has more processing 
steps than can be listed on one page. The Seafood 
HACCP Regulation does not require that the 
hazard analysis be kept in writing. However, 
FDA expects that a written hazard analysis will 
be useful when you perform mandatory HACCP 
plan reassessments and when you are asked by 
regulators to justify why certain hazards were or 
were not included in your HACCP plan. 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE STEPS	 
Following is a list of the steps that this guidance  
uses in HACCP plan development: 
Preliminary Steps 
Provide general information; 
Describe the food; 
Describe the method of distribution and
storage; 
Identify the intended use and consumer;
Develop a flow diagram. 
Hazard Analysis Worksheet 
Set up the Hazard Analysis Worksheet; 
Identify potential species-related hazards;
Identify potential process-related hazards;
Understand the potential hazard;
Determine whether the potential hazard 
is significant; 
Identify critical control points.
HACCP Plan Form 
Set up the HACCP Plan Form; 
Set critical limits;
Establish monitoring procedures:
What,
 
How,
 
Frequency,
 
Who;
 
Establish cor
rective action procedures; 
Establish a recordkeeping system; 
Establish verification procedures. 
PRELIMINAR Y STEPS 
STEP 1: Provide general information. 
•	 
° 
° 
° 
° 
° 
•	 
° 
° 
° 
° 
° 
° 
•	 
° 
° 
° 
•	 
•	 
•	 
•	 
° 
° 
° 
Record the name and address of your processing 
facility in the spaces provided on the first page 
of both the Hazard Analysis Worksheet and the 
HACCP Plan Form (Appendix 1). 
STEP 2: Describe the food. 
Identify the market name or Latin name (species) 
of the fishery component(s) of the product. 
Examples: 
•	 Tuna (Thunnus albacares); 
•	 Shrimp (Pandals spp.); 
•	 Jack mackerel (Trachurus spp.). 
Fully describe the finished product food. 
Examples: 
•	 Individually quick frozen, cooked, peeled 
shrimp; 
•	 Fresh tuna steaks; 
•	 Frozen, surimi-based, imitation king crab 
legs; 
•	 Fresh, raw drum, in-the-round; 
•	 Raw shrimp, in-shell; 
•	 Raw, shucked clams; 
•	 Fresh seafood salad, with shrimp and blue 
crabmeat; 
•	 Frozen, breaded pollock sticks; 
•	 Frozen crab cakes. 
Describe the packaging type. 
Examples: 
•	 Vacuum-packaged plastic bag; 
•	 Aluminum can; 
•	 Bulk, in wax-coated paperboard box; 
•	 Plastic container with snap lid. 
Record this information in the space provided 
on the first page of both the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet and the HACCP Plan Form. 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STEP 3: Describe the method of distribution 
and storage. 
Identify how the product is distributed and stored 
after distribution. 
Examples: 
•	 Stored and distributed frozen; 
•	 Distributed on ice and then stored under 
refrigeration or on ice. 
Record this information in the space provided 
on the first page of both the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet and the HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 4: Identify the intended use and 
consumer. 
Identify how the product will be used by the end 
user or consumer. 
Examples: 
•	 To be heated (but not fully cooked) and 
served; 
•	 To be eaten with or without further cooking; 
•	 To be eaten raw or lightly cooked; 
•	 To be fully cooked before consumption; 
•	 To be further processed into a heat and serve 
product. 
Identify the intended consumer or user of the 
product. The intended consumer may be the 
general public or a particular segment of the 
population, such as infants or the elderly. The 
intended user may also be another processor that 
will further process the product. 
Examples: 
•	 By the general public; 
•	 By the general public, including some 
distribution to hospitals and nursing homes; 
•	 By another processing facility. 
Record this information in the space provided 
on the first page of both the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet and the HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 5: Develop a flow diagram. 
The purpose of the diagram is to provide a 
clear, simple description of the steps involved in 
the processing of your fishery product and its 
associated ingredients as they “flow” from receipt 
to distribution. The flow diagram should cover 
all steps in the process that your firm performs. 
Receiving and storage steps for each of the 
ingredients, including non-fishery ingredients, 
should be included. The flow diagram should be 
verified on-site for accuracy. 
Figure A-1 (Appendix 2) is an example of a flow 
diagram. 
HAZARD ANALYSIS WORKSHEET 
STEP 6: Set up the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet. 
Record each of the processing steps (from 
the flow diagram) in Column 1 of the Hazard 
Analysis Worksheet. 
STEP 7: Identify the potential species-related 
hazards. 
Biological, chemical, and physical hazards can 
affect the safety of fishery products. Some food 
safety hazards are associated with the product 
(e.g., the species of fish, the way in which the 
fish is raised or caught, and the region of the 
world from which the fish originates). These 
hazards are introduced outside the processing 
plant environment before, during, or after 
harvest. This guidance refers to these as “species­
related hazards.” Other food safety hazards are 
associated with the way in which the product 
is processed (e.g., the type of packaging, the 
manufacturing steps, and the kind of storage). 
These hazards are introduced within the 
processing plant environment. This guidance 
refers to these as “process-related hazards.” They 
are covered in Step 8. 
Find in Table 3-2 (Chapter 3) or Table 3-3 
(Chapter 3) the market name (Column 1) or 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Latin name (Column 2) of the product that you 
identified in Step 2. Use Table 3-2 for vertebrates 
(animals with backbones) such as finfish. Use 
Table 3-3 for invertebrates (animals without 
backbones) such as shrimp, oysters, crabs, and 
lobsters. Determine whether the species has a 
potential species-related hazard by looking for 
a “√” mark (or one- or three-letter codes for a 
natural toxin) in the right-hand columns of the 
table. If it does, record the potential species-
related hazard(s) in Column 2 of the Hazard 
Analysis Worksheet, at every processing step. 
Tables 3-2 and 3-3 include the best information 
currently available to FDA concerning hazards that 
are specific to each species of fish. You should use 
your own expertise, or that of outside experts, as 
necessary, to identify any hazards that may not 
be included in the table (e.g., those that may be 
new or unique to your region). You may already 
have effective controls in place for a number of 
these hazards as part of your routine or traditional 
handling practices. The presence of such controls 
does not mean that the hazard is not significant. 
The likelihood of a hazard occurring should be 
judged in the absence of controls. For example, the 
fact that scombrotoxin (histamine) development 
in a particular species of fish has not been noted 
may be the result of (1) the inability of the fish to 
produce histamine or (2) the existence of controls 
that are already in place to prevent its development 
(e.g., harvest vessel time and temperature controls). 
In the first case, the hazard is not reasonably 
likely to occur. In the second case, the hazard is 
reasonably likely to occur, and the controls should 
be included in the HACCP plan. 
STEP 8: Identify potential process-related 
hazards. 
Find in Table 3-4 (Chapter 3) the finished product 
food (Column 1) and package type (Column 2) 
that most closely match the information that you 
developed in Steps 2 and 3. Record the potential 
hazard(s) listed in the table for that product in 
Column 2 of the Hazard Analysis Worksheet, at 
every processing step. 
You may need to include potential hazards for 
more than one finished product food category 
from Table 3-4, which will happen when your 
product fits more than one description. For 
example, if you cook shrimp and use it to prepare 
a finished product salad, you should look at both 
the “cooked shrimp” and the “salads … prepared 
from ready-to-eat fishery products” categories in 
Table 3-4, Column 1. Potential hazards from both 
finished product food categories apply to your 
product and should be listed in Column 2 of the 
Hazard Analysis Worksheet. 
Table 3-4 includes the best information currently 
available to FDA concerning hazards that are 
related to specific processing techniques. You 
should use your own expertise, or that of outside 
experts as necessary, to identify any hazards 
that may not be included in the table (e.g., those 
that are new or unique to your physical plant, 
equipment, or process). 
STEP 9: Understand the potential hazard. 
Consult the hazards and controls chapters of 
this guidance document (Chapters 4 through 7, 
9, and 11 through 21) for each of the potential 
hazards that you entered in Column 2 of the 
Hazard Analysis Worksheet. These chapters offer 
guidance for completing your hazard analysis 
and developing your HACCP plan. Each chapter 
contains a section, “Understand the Potential 
Hazard,” that provides information about the 
significance of the hazard, the conditions under 
which it may develop in a fishery product, and 
methods available to control the hazard. 
STEP 10: Determine whether the potential 
hazard is significant. 
Narrow the list of potential hazards that you 
entered in Column 2 of the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet to those that are significant or, in 
other words, “reasonably likely to occur.” The 
Seafood HACCP Regulation defines a food safety 
hazard that is reasonably likely to occur as “one 
for which a prudent processor would establish 
controls because experience, illness data, 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scientific reports, or other information provide 
a basis to conclude that there is a reasonable 
possibility that it will occur in the particular type 
of fish or fishery product being processed in the 
absence of those controls.” 
The hazards and controls chapters of this 
guidance (Chapters 4 through 7, 9, and 11 
through 21) each contain a section, “Determine 
Whether this Potential Hazard Is Significant,” 
that provides information about how to assess 
the significance of potential hazards. You should 
evaluate the significance of a potential hazard 
independently at each processing step. It may 
be significant at one step but not at another. A 
potential hazard is significant at the processing 
or handling step if (1) it is reasonably likely that 
the hazard can be introduced at an unsafe level 
at that processing step; or (2) it is reasonably 
likely that the hazard can increase to an unsafe 
level at that processing step; or (3) it is significant 
at another processing or handling step and it 
can be prevented, eliminated, or reduced to 
an acceptable level at the current processing or 
handling step. When evaluating the significance 
of a hazard at a processing step, you should 
consider the method of distribution and storage 
and the intended use and consumer of the 
product, which you developed in Steps 3 and 4. 
If you determine that a potential hazard is 
significant at a processing step, you should 
answer “Yes” in Column 3 of the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet. If you determine that a potential 
hazard is not significant at a processing step, you 
should answer “No” in that column. You should 
record the reason for your “Yes” or “No” answer 
in Column 4. You need not complete Steps 11 
through 18 for a hazard for those processing 
steps where you have recorded a “No.” 
It is important to note that identifying a hazard 
as significant at a processing step does not mean 
that it must be controlled at that processing step. 
Step 11 will help you determine where in the 
process the critical control point is located. 
STEP 1 1: Identify critical control points. 
For each processing step where a significant 
hazard is identified in Column 3 of the Hazard 
Analysis Worksheet, determine whether it 
is necessary to exercise control at that step 
in order to control the hazard. Figure A-2 
(Appendix 3) is a critical control point (CCP) 
decision tree that can be used to aid you in 
your determination. 
The hazards and controls chapters of this 
guidance (Chapters 4 through 7, 9, and 11 
through 21) each contain a section, “Identify 
Critical Control Points (CCPs),” which provides 
information about where control should be 
exercised. Each chapter discusses one or more 
“control strategy example(s)” for how the hazard 
can be controlled, because there are often more 
ways than one to control a hazard. CCP(s) for 
one control strategy example often differ from 
those of another example for the same hazard. 
The control strategies contain preventive measure 
information. Record the preventive measure(s) in 
Column 5 of the Hazard Analysis Worksheet for 
each “Yes” answer in Column 3. 
For every significant hazard, there must be at 
least one CCP where the hazard is controlled 
(21 CFR 123.6(c)(2)). In some cases, control may 
be necessary at more than one CCP for a single 
hazard. In other cases, a processing step may 
be a CCP for more than one hazard. CCPs are 
points in the process (i.e., processing steps) 
where the HACCP control activities will occur. 
Control activities at a CCP can effectively prevent, 
eliminate, or reduce the hazard to an acceptable 
level (21 CFR 123.3(b)). 
If you determine that a processing step is a CCP 
for a significant hazard, you should enter “Yes” in 
Column 6 of the Hazard Analysis Worksheet. If 
you determine that a processing step is not a CCP 
for a significant hazard, you should enter “No” 
in that column. You need not complete Steps 12 
through 18 for a hazard for those processing steps 
where you have recorded a “No.” 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HACCP PLAN FORM 
STEP 12: Set up the HACCP Plan Form. 
Find the processing steps that you have identified 
as CCPs in Column 6 of the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet. Record the names of these processing 
steps in Column 1 of the HACCP Plan Form. 
Enter the hazard(s) for which these processing 
steps were identified as CCPs in Column 2 of 
the HACCP Plan Form. This information can 
be found in Column 2 of the Hazard Analysis 
Worksheet. 
Complete Steps 13 through 18 for each of the 
significant hazards. These steps involve setting 
critical limits, establishing monitoring procedures, 
establishing corrective action procedures, 
establishing a recordkeeping system, and 
establishing verification procedures. 
STEP 13: Set critical limits. 
For each processing step where a significant 
hazard is identified on the HACCP Plan Form, 
identify the maximum or minimum value to 
which a parameter of the process must be 
controlled in order to control the hazard. Each 
control strategy example provided in the hazards 
and controls chapters of this guidance (Chapters 
4 through 7, 9, and 11 through 21) each contain 
a section, “Set Critical Limits,” that provides 
information about appropriate critical limits for 
each of the control strategy example(s) discussed. 
You should set a critical limit at such a value that 
if it is not met, the safety of the product may be 
questionable. If you set a more restrictive critical 
limit, you could, as a result, be required to take 
corrective action when no safety concern actually 
exists. On the other hand, if you set a critical 
limit that is too loose, you could, as a result, 
allow an unsafe product to reach the consumer. 
As a practical matter, it may also be advisable 
to set an operating limit that is more restrictive 
than the critical limit. In this way, you can adjust 
the process when the operating limit is not 
met, but before a critical limit deviation would 
require you to take corrective action. You should 
set operating limits based on your experience 
with the variability of your operation and with 
the closeness of typical operating values to the 
critical limit. 
Consider that the critical limit should directly 
relate to the parameter that you will be 
monitoring. For example, if you intend to 
monitor the temperature of the water in the 
cooker and the speed of the belt that carries the 
product through the cooker (because you have 
determined that these factors result in the desired 
internal product temperature for the desired 
time), you should specify water temperature 
and belt speed as critical limits, not the internal 
temperature of the product. 
Enter the critical limit(s) in Column 3 of the 
HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 14: Establish monitoring procedures. 
For each processing step where a significant 
hazard is identified on the HACCP Plan Form, 
describe monitoring procedures that will ensure 
that critical limits are consistently met (21 CFR 
123.6(c)(4)). The hazards and controls chapters 
of this guidance document (Chapters 4 through 
7, 9, and 11 through 21) each contain a section, 
“Establish Monitoring Procedures,” that provides 
information about appropriate monitoring 
procedures for each of the control strategy 
example(s) discussed. 
To fully describe your monitoring program, you 
should answer four questions: (1) What will be 
monitored? (2) How will monitoring be done? (3) 
How often will monitoring be done (frequency)? 
and (4) Who will do the monitoring? 
It is important for you to keep in mind that the 
monitoring process should directly measure 
the parameter for which you have established 
a critical limit. The necessary frequency of 
monitoring is dependent upon the circumstances. 
Continuous monitoring is always desirable, and 
in some cases necessary. In other cases, it may 
not be necessary or practical. You should monitor 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
often enough that the normal variability in the 
values you are measuring will be detected. This 
is especially true if these values are typically 
close to the critical limit. Additionally, the greater 
the time span between measurements, the 
more products you are putting at risk should a 
measurement show a deviation from a critical 
limit has occurred, because you should assume 
that the critical limit had not been met since 
the last “good” value. Even with continuous 
monitoring, the paper or electronic record of the 
continuous monitoring should be periodically 
checked in order to determine whether 
deviations from the critical limit have occurred. 
The frequency of that check should be at least 
daily, and more frequent if required in order to 
implement an appropriate corrective action. 
Enter the “What,” “How,” “Frequency,” and “Who” 
monitoring information in Columns 4, 5, 6, and 7, 
respectively, of the HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 15: Establish corrective action 
procedures. 
A corrective action must be taken whenever there 
is a deviation from a critical limit at a CCP (21 
CFR 123.7(
(a)). For each processing step where 
a significant hazard is identified on the HACCP 
Plan Form, describe the procedures that you 
will use when your monitoring indicates that 
the critical limit has not been met. Note that the 
Seafood HACCP Regulation does not require 
that you predetermine your corrective actions. 
You may instead elect to follow the prescribed 
corrective action procedures listed at 21 CFR 
123.7(c). However, a predetermined corrective 
action has the following advantages: (1) It 
provides detailed instructions to the processing 
employee that can be followed in the event of a 
critical limit deviation; (2) it can be prepared at a 
time when an emergency situation is not calling 
for an immediate decision; and (3) it removes 
the obligation to reassess the HACCP plan in 
response to a critical limit deviation. 
The hazards and controls chapters of this 
guidance (Chapters 4 through 7, 9, and 11 
through 21) each contain a section, “Establish 
Corrective Action Procedures,” that provides 
information about appropriate corrective action 
procedures for each of the control strategy 
example(s) discussed. An appropriate corrective 
action procedure must accomplish two goals: (1) 
ensure that an unsafe product does not reach 
the consumer and (2) correct the problem that 
caused the critical limit deviation (21 CFR 123.7). 
If the corrective action involves testing the 
finished product, the limitations of the sampling 
plan should be understood. Because of these 
limitations, microbiological testing is often not a 
suitable corrective action. The Seafood HACCP 
Regulation requires that corrective actions be fully 
documented in records (21 CFR 123.7(d)). Note 
that if a critical limit deviation occurs repeatedly, 
the adequacy of that CCP for controlling the 
hazard should be reassessed. Remember that 
deviations from operating limits do not need to 
result in formal corrective actions. 
Enter the corrective action procedures in Column 
8 of the HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 16: Establish a recordkeeping system. 
For each processing step where a significant 
hazard is identified on the HACCP Plan Form, list 
the records that will be used to document the 
accomplishment of the monitoring procedures 
discussed in Step 14 (21 CFR 123.9(a)(2)). 
The hazards and controls chapters of this 
guidance (Chapters 4 through 7, 9, and 11 
through 21) each contain a section, “Establish 
a Recordkeeping System,” that provides 
information about appropriate records for each 
of the control strategy example(s) discussed. 
Records must document monitoring of the 
CCP and shall contain the actual values and 
observations obtained during monitoring (21 
CFR 123.6(b)(7)) The Seafood HACCP Regulation 
lists specific requirements about the content of 
the records (21 CFR 123.9(a)). 
Enter the names of the HACCP monitoring 
records in Column 9 of the HACCP Plan Form. 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STEP 17: Establish verification procedures. 
For each processing step where a significant 
hazard is identified on the HACCP Plan Form, 
describe the verification procedures that will 
ensure that the HACCP plan is (1) adequate to 
address the hazard and (2) consistently being 
followed (21 CFR 123.6(c)(6)). 
The hazards and controls chapters of this 
guidance (Chapters 4 through 7, 9, and 11 through 
21) each contain a section, “Establish Verification 
Procedures,” that provides information about 
appropriate verification activities for each of 
the control strategy example(s) discussed. The 
information covers validation of the adequacy 
of critical limits (e.g., process establishment); 
calibration (including accuracy checks) of CCP 
monitoring equipment; performance of periodic 
end-product and in-process testing; and review 
of monitoring, corrective action, and verification 
records. Note that the Seafood HACCP Regulation 
does not require product testing (21 CFR 
123.8(a)(2)(iii)). However, it can be a useful tool, 
especially when coupled with a relatively weak 
monitoring procedure, such as reliance upon 
suppliers’ certificates. 
When calibration or an accuracy check of a CCP 
monitoring instrument shows that the instrument 
is not accurate, you should evaluate the monitoring 
records since the last instrument calibration to 
determine whether the inaccuracy would have 
contributed to a critical limit deviation. For this 
reason, HACCP plans with infrequent calibration 
or accuracy checks can place more products at risk 
than those with more frequent checks should a 
problem with instrument accuracy occur. 
Enter the verification procedures in Column 10 of 
the HACCP Plan Form. 
STEP 18: Complete the HACCP Plan Form. 
When you have finished these steps for all 
significant hazards that relate to your product, 
you will have completed the HACCP Plan Form. 
You should then sign and date the first page of 
the HACCP Plan Form. The signature must be 
that of the most responsible individual on-site at 
your processing facility or a higher level official 
(21 CFR 123.6(d)(1)). It signifies that the HACCP 
plan has been accepted for implementation by 
your firm. 
CHAPTER 2: Conducting a Hazard Analysis and Developing a HACCP Plan 
28 
CHAPTER 3 : POTENTIAL SPECIES-RELATED 
AND PROCESS-RELATED HAZARDS 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
INTRODUCTION
•	 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify potential 
food safety hazards that are species related and 
process related.  It also provides information on 
how the illicit substitution of one species for another 
can impact on the identification of species-related 
hazards.
To assist in identifying species-related and process-
related hazards, this chapter contains three tables: 
•	 Table 3-2, “Potential Vertebrate Species-Related 
Hazards,” contains a list of potential hazards 
that are associated with specific species of 
vertebrates (species with backbones).  These 
hazards are referred to as species-related 
hazards; 
•	 Table 3-3, “Potential Invertebrate Species-
Related Hazards,” contains a list of potential 
hazards that are associated with specific species 
of invertebrates (species without backbones).  
These hazards are also referred to as species-
related hazards; and  
•	 Table 3-4, “Potential Process-Related Hazards,” 
contains a list of potential hazards that are 
associated with specific finished fishery 
products, as a result of the finished product 
form, the package type, and the method of 
distribution and storage.  These hazards are 
referred to as process-related hazards. 
It is important to note that the tables provide lists 
of potential hazards. You should use the tables, 
together with the information provided in Chapters 
4 through 21, and your own expertise or that of 
outside experts, to determine whether the hazard 
is significant for your particular product and, if so, 
how it should be controlled. 
•	 Species substitution
Illicit substitution of one species for another may 
constitute economic fraud and/or misbranding 
violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act.  Furthermore, species substitution may cause 
potential food safety hazards to be overlooked 
or misidentified by processors or end users, as 
shown in Table 3-1, “ The Effect of Misbranding 
through Species Substitution on the Identification 
of Potential Species-Related Hazards .”  These 
examples are based on actual incidents of species 
substitution or misbranding. 
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 1 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-1. 
THE EFFECT OF MISBRANDING THROUGH SPECIES SUBSTITUTION ON THE IDENTIFICATION OF 
POTENTIAL SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS
Actual Market Name of 
Product.
Potential Species-Related 
Hazards Associated with 
the Actual Product.
(Table 3-2).
Product Inappropriately 
Labeled as: 
Potential Species-Related 
Hazards that would 
be Identified Based on 
Inappropriate Species 
Labeling.
(Table 3-2).
Escolar. Gempylid Fish Poisoning:
Scombrotoxin (Histamine).
Sea Bass. Parasites.
Puffer Fish. Tetrodotoxin (Pufferfish 
Poisoning);
Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning.
Monkfish. Parasites.
Spanish Mackerel. Parasites; 
Scombrotoxin (Histamine);
Ciguatera Fish Poisoning.
Kingfish. None.
Basa. Environmental Chemicals;
Aquaculture Drugs.
Grouper. Parasites;
Ciguatera Fish Poisoning.
Grouper. Parasites; 
Ciguatera Fish Poisoning.
Cod. Parasites. 
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 2 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
AHOLEHOLE Kuhlia spp.
ALEWIFE or RIVER 
HERRING
Alosa pseudoharengus
ALFONSINO Beryx spp.
ALFONSINO Centroberyx spp.
ALLIGATOR Alligator mississipiensis
ALLIGATOR Alligator sinensis
ALLIGATOR, aquacultured Alligator mississipiensis
ALLIGATOR, aquacultured Alligator sinensis
AMBERJACK Seriola dumerili CFP
AMBERJACK S. rivoliana CFP
AMBERJACK S. spp.
AMBERJACK or 
YELLOWTAIL
Seriola lalandi
AMBERJACK or 
YELLOWTAIL, aquacultured
Seriola lalandi
 4
AMBERJACK or BURI, 
aquacultured
Seriola quinqueradiata
ANCHOVY. 12 Anchoa spp.
 ASP. 5
ANCHOVY . 12 Anchoviella spp.
 ASP. 5
ANCHOVY . 12 Cetengraulis mysticetus
 ASP. 5
ANCHOVY . 12 Engraulis spp.
 ASP. 5
ANCHOVY . 12 Stolephorus spp.
 ASP. 5
ANGELFISH Holacanthus spp.
ANGELFISH Pomacanthus spp.
ARGENTINE QUEENFISH Argentina elongata
ATKA MACKEREL Pleurogrammus 
monopterygius
3 - 3 (August 2019). 
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
BARRACUDA Sphyraena barracuda CFP
BARRACUDA S. jello CFP
BARRACUDA S. spp.
BARRAMUNDI Lates calcarifer
BARRAMUNDI, 
aquacultured
Lates calcarifer
BASA or BOCOURTI Pangasius bocourti
BASA or BOCOURTI, 
aquacultured
Pangasius bocourti
BASS Ambloplites spp.
BASS Micropterus spp.
BASS Morone spp.
BASS Stereolepis gigas
BASS Synagrops bellus
BASS, aquacultured Centropristis spp.
BASS, aquacultured Morone spp.
BASS, SEA Acanthistius brasilianus
BASS, SEA Centropristis spp.
BASS, SEA Dicentrarchus labrax
BASS, SEA Lateolabrax japonicus
BASS, SEA Paralabrax spp.
BASS, SEA Paranthias furcifer
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 4 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
BASS, SEA (cont.) Polyprion americanus
BASS, SEA P . oxygeneios
BASS, SEA P . yanezi
BASS, SEA, aquacultured Dicentrarchus labrax
BATA Labeo bata
BIGEYE Priacanthus arenatus
BIGEYE Pristigenys alta
BLUEFISH Pomatomus saltatrix
BLUEGILL Lepomis macrochirus
BLUENOSE Hyperoglyphe antarctica
BOMBAY DUCK Harpadon nehereus
BONITO Cybiosarda elegans
BONITO Gymnosarda unicolor
BONITO Orcynopsis unicolor
BONITO Sarda spp.
BOWFIN and roe Amia calva
BREAM Abramis brama
BREAM Acanthopagrus spp.
BREAM Argyrops spp.
BREAM Gymnocranius grandoculis
BREAM Monotaxis spp.
BREAM Sparus aurata
BREAM Wattsia spp.
BREAM, aquacultured Abramis brama
BREAM or BOGUE Boops boops
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 5 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
BREAM, THREADFIN Nemipterus japonicus
BUFFALOFISH Ictiobus spp.
BULLHEAD Ameiurus spp.
BURBOT Lota lota
BUTTERFISH Odax pullus
BUTTERFISH Peprilus spp.
BUTTERFISH Pampus cinereus
CAPARARI Pseudoplatystoma tigrinum
CAPELIN and roe Mallotus villosus
CARP Barbonymus spp.
CARP Carassius carassius
CARP Cyprinus carpio
CARP Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
CARP H. nobilis
CARP , aquacultured Carassius carassius
CARP , aquacultured Cyprinus carpio
CARP , aquacultured Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
CARP , aquacultured H. nobilis.
CASCARUDO Callichthys callichthys
CATFISH Ameiurus catus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 6 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
CATFISH (cont.) Ictalurus spp.
CATFISH Pylodictis oliveris
CATFISH, aquacultured Ictalurus spp.
CHAR Salvelinus alpinus
CHAR, aquacultured Salvelinus alpinus
CHARACIN Leporinus obtusidens
CHARAL Chirostoma jordani
CHIMAERA Harriota raleighana
CHIMAERA Hydrolagus spp.
CHIRING Apocryptes bato
CHUB Coregonus kiyi
CHUB Kyphosus spp.
CHUB Semotilus atromaculatus
CISCO or CHUB Coregonus alpenae
CISCO or CHUB C. reighardi
CISCO or CHUB C. zenithicus
CISCO or TULLIBEE Coregonus artedi
CLARIAS FISH or WALKING 
CLARIAS FISH
Clarias spp.
CLARIAS FISH or WALKING 
CLARIAS FISH, or 
CLARESSE, aquacultured
Clarias gariepinus x Clarias 
macrocephalus
CLARIAS FISH or WALKING 
CLARIAS FISH, or 
CLARESSE, aquacultured
C. spp.
CLARIAS FISH or WALKING 
CLARIAS FISH, or 
CLARESSE, aquacultured
Heterobranchus longifilis x 
Clarias gariepinus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 7 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
COBIA Rachycentron canadum
COBIA, aquacultured Rachycentron canadum
COD Arctogadus spp.
COD Boreogadus saida
COD Eleginus gracilis
COD Gadus spp.
COD or ALASKA COD Gadus macrocephalus
COD, MORID Lotella rhacina
COD, MORID Mora moro
COD, MORID Pseudophycis barbata
COD, MORID P.  spp.
COD, aquacultured Gadus morhua
COROATA Platynematichthys notatus
CORVINA Cilus gilberti
CORVINA Micropogonias undulates
CRAPPIE Pomoxis spp.
CROAKER Argyrosomus spp.
CROAKER Bairdiella spp.
CROAKER Cheilotrema saturnum
CROAKER Genyonemus lineatus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 8 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
CROAKER (cont.) Micropogonias spp.
CROAKER Nebris microps
CROAKER Nibea spp.
CROAKER Odontoscion dentex
CROAKER Pachypops spp.
CROAKER Pachyurus spp.
CROAKER Paralonchurus spp.
CROAKER Plagioscion spp.
CROAKER Pseudotolithus spp.
CROAKER Pterotolithus spp.
CROAKER Roncador stearnsii
CROAKER Umbrina roncador
CROAKER or CORVINA Cynoscion spp.
CROAKER or SHADEFISH Argyrosomus regius
CROAKER or YELLOWFISH Larimichthys polyactis
CURIMBATA or 
GURAMATA
Prochilodus lineatus
CUSK Brosme brosme
CUSK-EEL Brotula clarkae
CUSK-EEL Lepophidium spp.
CUTLASSFISH Aphanopus carbo
CUTLASSFISH Lepidopus caudatus
CUTLASSFISH Trichiurus spp.
DACE Rhinichthys spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 9 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
DACE, aquacultured Rhinichthys spp.
DORAB Chirocentrus dorab
DORY Cyttus novaezealandiae
DORY Zenopsis spp.
DORY Zeus spp.
DRIFTFISH Hyperoglyphe spp.
DRUM Collichthys spp.
DRUM Equetus punctatus
DRUM Larimus spp.
DRUM Pogonias cromis
DRUM Stellifer spp.
DRUM Totoaba macdonaldi
DRUM Umbrina coroides
DRUM or CUBBYU Pareques umbrosus
DRUM, FRESHWATER Aplodinotus grunniens
DRUM or MEAGRE Argyrosomus regius
DRUM or QUEENFISH Seriphus politus
DRUM or REDFISH Sciaenops ocellatus
DRUM or REDFISH, 
aquacultured
Sciaenops ocellatus
EEL Anguilla anguilla IHT
EEL A. spp.
EEL, aquacultured Anguilla anguilla IHT
EEL, aquacultured A. australis
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 10 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
EEL, aquacultured (cont.) A. dieffenbachii
EEL, aquacultured A. japonica
EEL, CONGER Ariosoma balearicum
EEL, CONGER Conger conger IHT
EEL, CONGER Conger spp.
EEL, CONGER Gnathophis cinctus
EEL, CONGER Paraconger caudilimbatus
EEL, CONGER Rhynchoconger spp.
EEL, FRESHWATER Anguilla rostrata
EEL, FRESHWATER, 
aquacultured
Anguilla rostrata
EEL, MORAY Gymnothorax funebris CFP
EEL, MORAY Lycodontis javanicus CFP
EEL, MORAY Muraena helena IHT
EEL, MORAY Muraena retifera CFP
EEL, SPINY Notacanthus chemnitzii
EELPOUT Zoarces americanus
EELPOUT Z. viviparus
ELEPHANT FISH Callorhynchus millii
EMPEROR Lethrinus spp. CFP
ESCOLAR or OILFISH Lepidocybium flavobrunneum GFP
ESCOLAR or OILFISH Ruvettus pretiosus GFP
FEATHERBACK Notopterus notopterus
FLATHEAD Platycephalus conatus
FLATWHISKERED FISH Pinirampus pirinampu
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 11 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
FLOUNDER. 15 Ancylopsetta dilecta
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Arnoglossus scapha
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Bothus spp.
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Chascanopsetta crumenalis
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Cleisthenes pinetorum
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Colistium spp.
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Cyclopsetta chittendeni
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Hippoglossina oblonga
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Hippoglossoides robustus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Limanda ferruginea
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Liopsetta glacialis
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Microstomus achne
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Paralichthys albigutta
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 P . olivaceus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 P . patagonicus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 P . squamilentus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Pelotretis flavilatus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Peltorhampus 
novaezeelandiae
1
FLOUNDER. 15 Platichthys spp.
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Pseudorhombus spp.
 1
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 12 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
FLOUNDER. 15  (cont.) Reinhardtius evermanni
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Rhombosolea spp.
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Samariscus triocellatus
 1
FLOUNDER. 15 Scophthalmus spp.
 1
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Ancylopsetta dilecta
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Arnoglossus scapha
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Bothus spp.
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Chascanopsetta crumenalis
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Cleisthenes pinetorum
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Colistium spp.
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Cyclopsetta chittendeni
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Hippoglossoides robustus
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Limanda ferruginea
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Liopsetta glacialis
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Microstomus achne
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Paralichthys spp.
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Pelotretis flavilatus
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Peltorhampus 
novaezeelandiae
4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Pseudorhombus spp.
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Reinhardtius evermanni
 4
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 13 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Rhombosolea spp.
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Samariscus triocellatus
 4
FLOUNDER. 15, 
aquacultured
Scophthalmus spp.
 4
FLOUNDER or DAB Limanda limanda
 1
FLOUNDER or DAB L. proboscidea
 1
FLOUNDER or DAB L. punctatissima. 7
1
FLOUNDER or FLUKE Paralichthys dentatus
 1
FLOUNDER or FLUKE P . flesus
 1
FLOUNDER or FLUKE P . lethostigma
 1
FLOUNDER or FLUKE P . microps
 1
FLOUNDER, 
ARROWTOOTH
Atheresthes stomias. 7
FLOUNDER OR 
CALIFORNIA FLOUNDER
Paralichthys californicus
FLYINGFISH and roe Cypselurus spp.
FLYINGFISH and roe Exocoetus spp.
FLYINGFISH and roe Fodiator acutus
FLYINGFISH and roe Hirundichthys spp.
FLYINGFISH and roe Oxyporhamphus micropterus
FLYINGFISH and roe Parexocoetus brachypterus
FLYINGFISH and roe Prognichthys gibbifrons
FROG Rana spp.
FROG, aquacultured Rana spp.
GAR Lepisosteus spp.
GEMFISH Epinnula magistralis
GEMFISH Nesiarchus nasutus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 14 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
GEMFISH or BARRACOUTA Rexea solandri
GEMFISH or BARRACOUTA Thyrsites atun
GEMFISH or CABALLA Thyrsites lepidopoides
GILLIBACKER or 
GILLEYBAKA or 
WHISKERFISH. 8
Sciades parkeri. 7
GOATFISH Mulloidichthys spp.
GOATFISH M. vanicolenis
GOATFISH Mullus auratus
GOATFISH Parupeneus spp.
GOATFISH Pseudupeneus spp.
GOATFISH Upeneichthys lineatus
GOATFISH Upeneus spp.
GOBY Neogobius melanostomus
GRAYLING Thymallus arcticus
GREENBONE Odax pullus
GREENLAND TURBOT Reinhardtius hippoglossoides
GREENLING Hexagrammos spp.
GRENADIER Coryphaenoides spp.
GRENADIER Lepidorhynchus denticulatus
GRENADIER Macruronus spp.
GRENADIER Nezumia bairdii
GRENADIER Trachyrhynchus spp.
GROUPER Anyperodon spp.
GROUPER Caprodon schlegelii
GROUPER Cephalopholis argus
 CFP
GROUPER C. miniata
 CFP
GROUPER C. spp.
 CFP
GROUPER Dermatolepis inermis
 CFP
GROUPER Diplectrum formosum
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 15 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
GROUPER (cont.) Epinephelus fuscoguttatus
 CFP
GROUPER E. lanceolatus
 CFP
GROUPER E. morio
 CFP
GROUPER E. spp.
 CFP
GROUPER Mycteroperca bonaci
 CFP
GROUPER M. spp.
 CFP
GROUPER M. venenosa
 CFP
GROUPER Variola louti
 CFP
GROUPER V. spp.
 CFP
GROUPER or CORAL 
GROUPER
Plectropomus spp.
 CFP
GROUPER or GAG Mycteroperca microlepis
 CFP
GROUPER or HIND Epinephelus guttatus
 CFP
GROUPER or JEWFISH Epinephelus itajara
 CFP
GROUPER or SCAMP Mycteroperca phenax
 CFP
GROUPER, ORANGE 
-SPOTTED, aquacultured
Epinephelus coioides
GROUPER, MALABAR, 
aquacultured 
Epinephelus malabaricus
GROUPER, aquacultured Epinephelus spp.
GRUNION Leuresthes tenuis
GRUNT Anisotremus interruptus
GRUNT Conodon nobilis
GRUNT Haemulon spp.
GRUNT Orthopristis chrysoptera
GRUNT Pomadasys crocro
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 16 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
GRUNT or CATALINA Anisotremus taeniatus
GRUNT or MARGATE Anisotremus surinamensis
GRUNT or MARGATE Haemulon album
GRUNT or SWEETLIPS Plectorhinchus spp.
HADDOCK Melanogrammus aeglefinus
HAKE Urophycis spp.
HALIBUT Hippoglossus spp.
HALIBUT, aquacultured Hippoglossus spp.
 4
HAMLET, MUTTON Alphestes afer
HERRING. 12 Alosa spp.
HERRING. 12 Etrumeus teres
HERRING. 12 Harengula thrissina
HERRING. 12 Ilisha spp.
HERRING. 12 Opisthopterus tardoore
HERRING. 12 Pellona ditchela
HERRING or SEA HERRING 
or SILD. 12
Clupea spp.
HERRING or SEA HERRING 
or SILD. 12 roe
Clupea spp.
HERRING, THREAD. 12 Opisthonema spp.
HIND Epinephelus adscensionis
 CFP
HIND E. drummondhayi
HIND E. guttatus
 CFP
HOGFISH Lachnolaimus maximus
 CFP
HORSE MACKEREL or 
SCAD
Trachurus trachurus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 17 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
JACK Carangoides bartholomaei
 CFP
JACK Caranx ignobilis
 CFP
JACK C. latus
 CFP
JACK C. lugubris
 CFP
JACK C. melampygus
 CFP
JACK C. ruber
 CFP
JACK C. spp.
 CFP
JACK Oligoplites saurus
 CFP
JACK Selene spp.
JACK Urapsis secunda
JACK or BLUE RUNNER Caranx crysos
 CFP
JACK or CREVALLE Alectis indicus
JACK or RAINBOW 
RUNNER
Elagatis bipinnulata
 CFP
JACK or ROOSTERFISH Nematistius pectoralis
JACKSMELT or SILVERSIDE Antherinopsis californiensis ASP
JOBFISH or SNAPPER Aphareus spp.
 CFP
JOBFISH or SNAPPER Aprion spp.
 CFP
JOBFISH or SNAPPER Pristipomoides spp.
 CFP
KAHAWAI Arripis spp.
KINGFISH. 6 Menticirrhus littoralis ASP
KINGFISH. 6 M. spp.
KINGKLIP Genypterus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 18 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
LADYFISH Elops spp.
LING Molva spp.
LING, MEDITERRANEAN Molva macrophthalma
LINGCOD Ophiodon elongatus
LIZARDFISH Synodus spp.
LOACH Somileptus gongota
LIONFISH Pterois miles CFP. 14
LIONFISH P . volitans CFP. 14
LUMPFISH roe Cyclopterus lumpus
MACKEREL Gasterochisma melampus
MACKEREL Grammatorcynus spp.
MACKEREL Rastrelliger kanagurta
MACKEREL Scomber scombrus
 PSP
MACKEREL, ATKA Pleurogrammus 
monopterygius
MACKEREL, CHUB Scomber spp.
MACKEREL, JACK Trachurus spp.
MACKEREL, SPANISH Scomberomorus spp.
MACKEREL, SPANISH or 
CERO
Scomberomorus regalis
 CFP
MACKEREL, SPANISH or 
KING
Scomberomorus cavalla
 CFP
MACKEREL, SPANISH or 
NARROW-BARRED
Scomberomorus commerson CFP
MAHI-MAHI Coryphaena spp.
MAHI-MAHI, aquacultured Coryphaena spp.
MARLIN Makaira spp.
MARLIN Tetrapturus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 19 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
MENHADEN Brevoortia partonus ASP
MENHADEN B. spp.
 9
 10
MENHADEN Ethmidium maculatum
 9
 10
MILKFISH Chanos chanos
MILKFISH, aquacultured Chanos chanos
MONKFISH Lophius spp.
MORWONG Aplodactylus arctidens
MORWONG Cheilodactylus spp.
MORWONG Goniistius spp.
MORWONG Nemadactylus spp.
MULLET Agonostomus monticola
MULLET Aldrichetta forsteri
MULLET Crenimugil crenilabis
MULLET Mugil cephalus
MULLET M. curerna
 ASP
MULLET M. spp.
MULLET M. thoburni
MULLET Mullus spp.
MUSKELLUNGE Esox masquinongy
NILE PERCH Lates niloticus
NILE PERCH, aquacultured Lates niloticus
OPAH Lampris guttatus
OPALEYE Girella nigricans
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 20 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
OREO DORY. 12 Allocyttus niger
OREO DORY . 12 Neocyttus spp.
OREO DORY . 12 Pseudocyttus spp.
OSCAR Astronotus ocellatus
OSCAR, aquacultured Astronotus ocellatus
PACU Myleus pacu
PADDLEFISH and roe Polyodon spp.
PADDLEFISH and roe, 
aquacultured
Polyodon spp.
PANGASIUS, GIANT Pangasius gigas
PANGASIUS, GIANT P . sanitwongsei
PANGASIUS SHORTBARBEL Pangasius micronemus
PARROTFISH Bolbometopon spp.
PARROTFISH Chlorurus gibbus CFP. 2
PARROTFISH Scarus coeruleus CFP
PARROTFISH S. taeniopterus CFP
PARROTFISH Sparisoma chrysopterum CFP
PARROTFISH S. viride CFP
PATAGONIAN TOOTHFISH 
or CHILEAN SEABASS
Dissostichus eleginoides
PATAGONIAN TOOTHFISH 
or CHILEAN SEABASS, 
aquacultured
Dissostichus eleginoides
PERCH Hermosilla azurea
PERCH Perca fluviatilis
PERCH, LAKE or YELLOW Perca flavescens
PERCH, NILE Lates niloticus
PERCH, NILE, aquacultured Lates niloticus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 21 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
PERCH, OCEAN or 
ROCKFISH
Sebastes spp.
PERCH, PILE Rhacochilus vacca
PERCH, SILVER Bairdiella chrysoura
PERCH, WHITE Morone americana
PICAREL Spicara maena
PICKEREL Esox spp.
PIKE Esox lucius
PILCHARD or SARDINE Sardina pilchardus
PILCHARD or SARDINE Sardinops spp. ASP. 5
PIRAMUTABA or LAULAO 
FISH. 8
Brachyplatystoma vaillantii
PLAICE Hippoglossoides platessoides
PLAICE Pleuronectes platessa
PLAICE P . quadrituberculatus
POLLOCK Pollachius pollachius
POLLOCK P . virens
POLLOCK or WALLEYE 
POLLOCK
Gadus chalcogrammus. 7
POMFRET Brama spp.
POMFRET Parastromateus spp.
POMFRET Taractes rubescens
POMPANO Alectis ciliaris CFP
POMPANO Parastromateus niger
POMPANO Trachinotus spp.
POMPANO, aquacultured Trachinotus carolinus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 22 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
POMPANO or PERMIT Trachinotus kennedyi
POMPANO or PERMIT T. falcatus
POMPANO or POMPANITO Trachinotus rhodopus
PORGY Calamus spp. CFP
PORGY Chrysophrys auratus
PORGY Dentex spp.
PORGY Diplodus spp.
PORGY Lagodon rhomboides
PORGY Pagrus spp.
PORGY Pterogymnus laniarus
PORGY Stenotomus caprinus
PORGY or SCUP Stenotomus chrysops
PUFFER FISH. 8, 16 Sphoeroides maculatus. 11b
PUFFER FISH. 8,16 S. nephelus. 11a PFP
PUFFER FISH. 8,16 Takifugu rubripes. 11c PFP
PUFFER FISH. 8, 16, 
aquacultured
Takifugu rubripes. 11c PFP
RACEHORSE Congiopodus leucopaecilus
RITA Rita rita
ROCKFISH Scorpaena cardinalis
ROCKFISH S. papillosus
ROCKFISH Sebastes spp.
ROCKLING Ciliata spp.
ROHU Labeo rohita
ROSEFISH Helicolenus dactylopterus
ROUGHY Paratrachichthys trailli
ROUGHY , ORANGE. 12 Hoplostethus atlanticus
ROUGHY , SILVER Hoplostethus mediterraneus
SABLEFISH Anoplopoma fimbria
SABLEFISH, aquaculture Anoplopoma fimbria
SAILFISH Istiophorus platypterus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 23 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SALMON and roe, 
aquacultured
Oncorhynchus spp.
 4
SALMON and roe, 
aquacultured
Salmo salar
 4
SALMON and roe (WILD, 
FRESHWATER)
Oncorhynchus spp.
SALMON and roe (WILD, 
FRESHWATER)
Salmo salar
SALMON and roe, (WILD, 
OCEAN)
Oncorhynchus spp.
SALMON and roe, (WILD, 
OCEAN)
Salmo salar
SANDDAB Citharichthys sordidus
SANDPERCH Mugiloides chilensis
SANDPERCH Parapercis spp.
SARDINE. 12 Harengula clupeola ASP
SARDINE. 12 H. jaguana ASP
SARDINE. 12 H. spp.
SARDINE. 12 Sardinella spp.
SARDINE. 12 Sardinops sagax ASP
SAUGER Sander canadensis
SAURY Cololabis saira
SAURY Scomberesox saurus
SCAD Atule mate
SCAD Decapterus spp.
SCAD Selar crumenophthalmus
SCAD Trachurus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 24 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SCAD or HORSE 
MACKEREL
Trachurus trachurus
SCULPIN Hemitripterus americanus
SCULPIN Myoxocephalus 
polyacanthocephalus
SCULPIN Scorpaenichthys marmoratus
SEA BREAM Archosargus rhomboidalis
SEA BREAM Chrysophrys auratus
SEA BREAM Pagellus spp.
SEA BREAM, aquacultured Sparus aurata
SEAROBIN Chelidonichthys spp.
SEAROBIN Peristedion miniatum
SEAROBIN Prionotus carolinus
SEAROBIN Pterygotrigla picta
SEATROUT Cynoscion spp.
SHAD Alosa spp. ASP. 5
SHAD roe Alosa spp.
SHAD, GIZZARD Dorosoma spp.
SHAD, GIZZARD Nematoalosa vlaminghi
SHAD, HILSA Tenualosa ilisha
SHARK Carcharhinus spp.
SHARK Cetorhinus maximus
SHARK Galeocerdo cuvier
SHARK Galeorhinus spp.
SHARK Hexanchus griseus
SHARK Lamna ditropis
SHARK Negaprion brevirostris
SHARK Notorynchus cepedianus
SHARK Prionace glauca
SHARK Sphyrna spp.
SHARK Triaenodon obesus
SHARK Triakis semifasciata
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 25 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SHARK, ANGEL Squatina spp.
SHARK, DOGFISH or CAPE 
SHARK
Centrophorus spp.
SHARK, DOGFISH or CAPE 
SHARK
Mustelus spp.
SHARK, DOGFISH or CAPE 
SHARK
Scyliorhinus spp.
SHARK, DOGFISH or CAPE 
SHARK
Squalus spp.
SHARK, MAKO Isurus spp.
SHARK or PORBEAGLE Lamna nasus
SHARK or 
SMOOTHHOUND
Mustelus spp.
SHARK, THRESHER Alopias spp.
SHEEPHEAD Archosargus probatocephalus
SHEEPHEAD Semicossyphus pulcher
SHINER Notropis spp.
SILVERSIDE Atherinopsis californiensis ASP
SILVERSIDE A. spp.
SILVERSIDE Basilichthys australis
SILVERSIDE Membras marinica ASP
SILVERSIDE Menidia menidia
SKATE Amblyraja spp.
SKATE Bathyraja spp.
SKATE Leucoraja spp.
SKATE Malacoraja spp.
SKATE Raja spp.
SKILLFISH Erilepis zonifer
SMELT Allosmerus elongatus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 26 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SMELT (cont.) Argentina spp.
SMELT Hypomesus spp.
SMELT Osmerus spp.
SMELT Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis
SMELT Retropinna retropinna
SMELT Spirinchus spp.
SMELT Thaleichthys pacificus
SNAKEHEAD Channa striata
SNAKEHEAD Parachanna obscura
SNAPPER Apsilus dentatus
SNAPPER Etelis spp.
SNAPPER Lutjanus bohar CFP
SNAPPER L. buccanella CFP
SNAPPER L. cyanopterus CFP
SNAPPER L. gibbus CFP
SNAPPER L.  griseus CFP
SNAPPER L. jocu CFP
SNAPPER L. sebae CFP
SNAPPER Macolor spp.
SNAPPER Ocyurus chrysurus CFP. 14
SNAPPER Pristipomoides spp.
 CFP
SNAPPER Rhomboplites aurorubens
SNAPPER Symphorichthys spilurus
SNAPPER Symphorus nematophorus CFP
SNAPPER or 
SCHOOLMASTER
Lutjanus apodus CFP
SNAPPER, aquacultured Lutjanus spp.
SNOOK Centropomus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 27 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SOLE or FLOUNDER Aseraggodes spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER Austroglossus spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER Brachirus orientalis
SOLE or FLOUNDER Buglossidium luteum
SOLE or FLOUNDER Clidoderma asperrimum
SOLE or FLOUNDER Embassichthys bathybius
SOLE or FLOUNDER Eopsetta jordani
SOLE or FLOUNDER Glyptocephalus spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER G. zachirus
SOLE or FLOUNDER Gymnachirus melas
SOLE or FLOUNDER Hippoglossina spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER Lepidopsetta bilineata
SOLE or FLOUNDER Lyopsetta exilis
SOLE or FLOUNDER Microchirus spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER Microstomus kitt
SOLE or FLOUNDER M. pacificus
SOLE or FLOUNDER Parophrys vetulus
SOLE or FLOUNDER Psettichthys melanostictus
SOLE or FLOUNDER Pseudopleuronectes 
americanus
SOLE or FLOUNDER Solea solea
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 28 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SOLE or FLOUNDER (cont.) Trinectes spp.
SOLE or FLOUNDER Xystreurys liolepis
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Aseraggodes spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Austroglossus spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Brachirus orientalis
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Buglossidium luteum
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Clidoderma asperrimum
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Embassichthys bathybius
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Eopsetta jordani
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Glyptocephalus spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
G. zachirus
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Gymnachirus melas
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Hippoglossina spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Lepidopsetta bilineata
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Lyopsetta exilis
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Microchirus spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Parophrys vetulus
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Psettichthys melanostictus
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Pseudopleuronectes 
americanus
4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Solea solea
 4
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 29 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured (cont.)
Trinectes spp.
 4
SOLE or FLOUNDER, 
aquacultured
Xystreurys liolepis
 4
SORUBIM or SURUBI Pseudoplatystoma corruscans
SPADEFISH Chaetodipterus spp.
SPEARFISH Tetrapturus spp.
SPOT Leiostomus xanthurus ASP
SPRAT or BRISTLING Sprattus spp.
SQUIRRELFISH Holocentrus spp.
SQUIRRELFISH Myripristis spp.
SQUIRRELFISH Sargocentron spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8
Acipenser spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8
Huso huso
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8
Pseudoscaphirhynchus spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8
Scaphirhynchus spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8, aquacultured
Acipenser spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8, aquacultured
Huso huso
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8, aquacultured
Pseudoscaphirhynchus spp.
STURGEON and roe 
(CAVIAR). 8, aquacultured
Scaphirhynchus spp.
SUCKER Carpiodes spp.
SUCKER Catostomus commersonii
SUCKER Cycleptus elongatus
SUCKER or REDHORSE Moxostoma macrolepidotum
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 30 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
SUNFISH Archoplites interruptus
SUNFISH Lepomis spp.
SURFPERCH Amphistichus spp.
SURFPERCH Cymatogaster aggregata
SURFPERCH Embiotoca spp.
SURFPERCH Hyperprosopon argenteum
SURFPERCH Rhacochilus toxotes
SUTCHI or SWAI Pangasianodon 
hypophthalmus
SUTCHI or SWAI, 
aquacultured
Pangasianodon 
hypophthalmus
SWORDFISH Xiphias gladius
TANG Acanthurus spp. CFP. 2
TANG Ctenochaetus striatus CFP. 2
TANG C. strigosus CFP. 2
TANG Naso spp. CFP. 2
TANG Zebrasoma spp.
TARPON Megalops atlanticus
TAUTOG Tautoga onitis
THORNYHEAD Sebastolobus spp.
THREADFIN Eleutheronema tetradactylum
THREADFIN Galeoides decadactylus
THREADFIN Polydactylus spp.
THREADFIN Polynemus spp.
TIGERFISH Datnioides microlepis
TIGERFISH D. polota
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 31 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
TILAPIA Oreochromis spp.
TILAPIA Sarotherodon spp.
TILAPIA Tilapia spp.
TILAPIA, aquacultured Oreochromis spp.
 4
TILAPIA, aquacultured Sarotherodon spp.
 4
TILAPIA, aquacultured Tilapia spp.
 4
TILEFISH Caulolatilus spp.
TILEFISH Lopholatilus 
chamaeleonticeps
TILEFISH Malacanthus plumieri
TILEFISH Prolatilus jugularis
TINFOIL Barbonymus altus
TOMCOD Microgadus spp.
TONGUESOLE Cynoglossus spp.
TRAHIRA Hoplias malabaricus
TREVALLY Caranx ignobilis
 CFP
TREVALLY C. melampygus
 CFP
TREVALLY C. spp.
TREVALLY Gnathanodon speciosus
TRIGGERFISH Balistes vetula CFP
TRIGGERFISH Canthidermis sufflamen
TRIGGERFISH Melichthys niger
TRIGGERFISH Navodon spp.
TRIPLETAIL Datnioides quadrifasciatus
TRIPLETAIL Lobotes spp.
TROUT, aquacultured Oncorhynchus aguabonita
TROUT, aquacultured O. clarkii
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 32 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
TROUT, aquacultured 
(cont.)
O. gilae
TROUT, aquacultured O. mykiss
TROUT, aquacultured Salmo trutta
TROUT, aquacultured Salvelinus fontinalis
TROUT, aquacultured S. malma
TROUT, aquacultured S. namaycush
TROUT, aquacultured Stenodus leucichthys
TROUT, RAINBOW or 
STEELHEAD
Oncorhynchus mykiss
TRUMPETER Latridopis spp.
TRUMPETER Latris lineata
TUNA Allothunnus fallai
TUNA Auxis spp.
TUNA Euthynnus spp.
TUNA Katsuwonus pelamis
TUNA Thunnus alalunga ASP
TUNA T. albacares
TUNA T. atlanticus
TUNA T. maccoyii
TUNA T. obesus
TUNA T. thynnus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 33 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
TUNA (cont.) T. tonggol
TUNA, aquacultured Thunnus spp.
 4
TURBOT Pleuronichthys guttulatus
TURBOT P.  spp.
TURBOT Psetta maxima
TURBOT Psettodes spp.
TURBOT Reinhardtius hippoglossoides
TURBOT, aquacultured Psetta maxima
 4
TURTLE Apalone spp.
TURTLE Chelydra spp.
TURTLE Malaclemys spp.
TURTLE Trachemys spp.
TURTLE, aquacultured Apalone spp.
TURTLE, aquacultured Chelydra spp.
TURTLE, aquacultured Malaclemys spp.
TURTLE, aquacultured Trachemys spp.
UNICORNFISH Naso unicornis CFP
WAHOO Acanthocybium solandri
WALLEYE Sander vitreus
WAREHOU Seriolella spp.
WEAKFISH Cynoscion spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 34 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Parasite 3 
Hazards
CHP 5
Natural 
Toxin 13 
Hazards
CHP 6
Scombrotoxin  
(Histamine) 
Hazards
CHP 7
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11
WEAKFISH or 
BANGAMARY
Macrodon ancylodon
WHISKERED FISH Arius spp.
WHISKERED FISH or 
GAFFTOPSAIL FISH
Bagre marinus
WHISKERED FISH or 
HARDHEAD WHISKERED 
FISH
Ariopsis felis
WHITEFISH Coregonus spp.
WHITEFISH Prosopium cylindraceum
WHITING Merluccius gayi
WHITING M. hubbsi
WHITING M. merluccius
WHITING, BLUE Micromesistius spp.
WHITING, NEW ZEALAND Macruronus novaezelandiae
WHITING or PACIFIC 
WHITING
Merluccius productus
WRASSE Cheilinus undulatus CFP
WOLFFISH Anarhichas spp.
YELLOWTAIL or 
AMBERJACK
Seriola lalandi
YELLOWTAIL or 
AMBERJACK, aquacultured
Seriola lalandi
 4
ZANDER Sander lucioperca
ZANDER, aquacultured Sander lucioperca
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 35 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-2. 
POTENTIAL VERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
17
ACRONYMS: ASP = Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning; CFP = Ciguatera Fish Poisoning; GFP = Gempylid Fish Poisoning; IHT = 
Ichthyohemotoxic fish; PSP = Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning; and PFP = Pufferfish Poisoning
FOOTNOTES: 
1. This hazard does not apply to offshore catch (e.g., areas not subject to shoreside contaminant discharges).
2. Indicates that the ciguatera hazard is associated with this species only in the tropical Pacific Ocean.
3. This hazard applies where the processor has knowledge or has reason to know that the parasite-containing fish or fishery product will 
be consumed without a process sufficient to kill the parasites, or where the processor represents, labels, or intends for the product to 
be so consumed.
4. Species that normally have a parasite hazard as a result of consuming infected prey apparently do not have the same parasite hazard 
when raised only on pelleted feed in an aquaculture operation. See Chapter 5 for further information.
5. This hazard only applies if the product is marketed uneviscerated.
6. Amberjack, yellowtail, Spanish mackerel, king mackerel, and other scombrotoxin-forming fish are sometimes marketed incorrectly as 
kingfish.
7. The scientific name for this species has changed since the previous edition of this guidance.
8. The market name for this species has been changed since the previous edition of this guidance.
9. This hazard does not apply to products intended for animal feed or fish oil products but does apply to products intended for direct hu-
man consumption of the muscle and to aqueous components, such as fish protein concentrates that are to be used as food additives.
10. This hazard only applies to food products for human consumption, such as oil extracts used as dietary ingredients.
11. Puffer Fish:
a. PFP has been associated with fish from the east coast of Florida specifically in the following counties: Volusia, Brevard, Indian 
River, St. Lucie, and Martin.
b. There have been no reported tetrodotoxin or PFP illnesses associated with this species as of May 2018.
c. Takifugu rubripies is the only species to be offered for importation from Japan based on the agreement between US FDA and the 
government of Japan.
12. Other Natural Marine Toxins may be applicable to this species. Refer to Chapter 6 for clarification.
13. Many of the fish and families of fish listed in this table have been identified with specific natural marine toxins as a result of illnesses/
outbreaks which have occurred or have been identified through research.  For further information regarding each toxin refer to Chapter 
6 and its references.
14. The toxin has been identified through an FDA research project; however, the toxin levels found do not exceed the established guidance 
levels and/or have not been associated with illnesses.
15. Other flounder are also known as sole and can be found under “Sole or Flounder.”
16. FDA recommends consuming these species of fish only as appropriate.
17. You should identify pathogens from the harvest area as a potential species-related hazard id you know, or have reason to know, that 
the fish will be consumer without a process sufficient to kill pathogens or if you represent, label, or intend for the product to be so 
consumed. (See Chapter 4 for guidance on controlling pathogens from the harvest area.)
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 36 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
ABALONE Haliotis laevigata
ABALONE H. ruber
ABALONE H. spp.
ABALONE Marinauris roei
ARKSHELL Anadara spp.
ARKSHELL Arca spp.
CLAM, BENTNOSE Macoma nasuta
CLAM BUTTER Saxidomus spp.
CLAM, CALICO Macrocallista maculata
CLAM, GEODUCK Panopea bitruncata
CLAM, GEODUCK P.  spp.
CLAM, HARD Arctica islandica
CLAM, HARD Meretrix spp.
CLAM, HARD Venus mortoni
CLAM, HARDSHELL or 
QUAHOG
Mercenaria spp.
CLAM, HARDSHELL or 
QUAHOG
Protothaca thaca
CLAM, LITTLENECK Protothaca staminea
CLAM, LITTLENECK P . tenerrima
CLAM, LITTLENECK Tapes variegata
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 37 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
CLAM, LITTLENECK (cont.) T. virginea
CLAM, LITTLENECK Venerupis aurea
CLAM, LITTLENECK V. decussata. 4
CLAM, LITTLENECK V. philippinarum
CLAM, MARSH Corbicula japonica
CLAM, PISMO Tivela stultorum
CLAM, RAZOR Ensis spp.
CLAM, RAZOR Siliqua spp.
CLAM, RAZOR Solen spp.
CLAM, RAZOR Tagelus spp.
CLAM, SANGUIN Sanguinolaria spp.
CLAM, SOFTSHELL Mya arenaria
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Mactra spp.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Mactrellona alata
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Mactromeris spp.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Mactrotoma spp.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Simomactra spp.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Spisula spp.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM Tresus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 38 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
CLAM, SURF or SURFCLAM, 
aquacultured
Mactra schalinensis
CLAM, VENUS Chione spp.
CLAM, VENUS Chionista spp.
CLAM, VENUS Macrocallista nimbosa
CLAM, WEDGE Paphies spp.
COCKLE Cardium spp.
COCKLE Clinocardium spp.
COCKLE Dinocardium robustum
COCKLE Serripes groenlandicus
CONCH Lambis lambis
CONCH Strombus spp.
COQUINA Donax spp.
COQUINA, FALSE Iphigenia brasiliana
CRAB, BENI-ZUWAI Chionocetes japonicus
CRAB, BLUE Callinectes sapidus
CRAB, BLUE, aquacultured Callinectes sapidus
CRAB, BROWN Chaceon fenneri
CRAB, GOLDEN KING Lithodes aequispinus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 39 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
CRAB, CENTOLLA Lithodes antarcticus
CRAB, CENTOLLA L. murrayi
CRAB, CHINESE MITTEN Eriocheir sinensis
CRAB, CHINESE MITTEN, 
aquacultured
Eriocheir sinensis
CRAB, DEEPSEA Paralomis granulosa
CRAB, DUNGENESS Metacarcinus magister. 4
2
CRAB, JAPANESE 
FRESHWATER
Geothelphusa dehaani
 1
CRAB, JONAH Cancer borealis
 2
CRAB, KING Paralithodes camtschaticus
CRAB, KING P . platypus
CRAB, KING or HANASAKI Paralithodes brevipes
CRAB, KOREAN or KEGANI Erimacrus isenbeckii
CRAB, LITHODES Neolithodes brodiei
CRAB, RED Chaceon quinquedens
CRAB, RED ROCK Cancer productus
 2
CRAB, ROCK Cancer irroratus
CRAB, ROCK C. pagurus
CRAB, SANTOLLA, NOVA, or 
SOUTHERN RED
Lithodes santolla
CRAB, SHEEP Loxorhynchus grandis
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 40 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
CRAB, SNOW Chionoecetes angulatus
CRAB, SNOW C. bairdi
CRAB, SNOW C. opilio
CRAB, SNOW C. tanneri
CRAB, SPIDER Jacquinotia edwardsii
CRAB, SPIDER Maja squinado
CRAB, STONE Menippe spp.
CRAB, SWAMP Scylla serrata
CRAB, SWAMP , 
aquacultured
Scylla serrata
CRAB, SWIMMING Callinectes arcuatus
CRAB, SWIMMING C. toxotes
CRAB, SWIMMING Ovalipes punctatus
CRAB, SWIMMING Portunus spp.
CRAB, SWIMMING, 
aquacultured
Portunus pelagicus
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Astacus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Cambarus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Cherax spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Euastacus armatus
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Pacifastacus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 41 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH 
(cont.)
Paranephrops spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH Procambarus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Astacus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Cambarus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Cherax spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Euastacus armatus
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Pacifastacus spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Paranephrops spp.
CRAWFISH or CRAYFISH, 
aquacultured
Procambarus spp.
CUTTLEFISH Sepia spp.
 2
JELLYFISH Rhopilema spp.
KRILL Euphausia spp.
KRILL Meganyctiphanes 
norvegica
KRILL Thysandoessa inermis
LANGOSTINO Cervimunida johni
LANGOSTINO Munida gregaria
LANGOSTINO Pleuroncodes spp.
LIMPET Cellana denticulata
LIMPET Diodora aspera
LIMPET Fissurella maxima
LIMPET Lottia gigantea
LIMPET Patella caerulea
LIMPET Tectura testudinalis
LOBSTER Homarus spp.
 2
 3
LOBSTER, NORWAY Nephrops norvegicus
LOBSTER, ROCK Jasus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 42 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
LOBSTER, ROCK or SPINY Palinurus spp.
LOBSTER, ROCK or SPINY Panulirus spp.
LOBSTER, SLIPPER Ibacus ciliatus
LOBSTER, SLIPPER Scyllarides spp.
LOBSTER, SLIPPER Thenus orientalis
LOBSTERETTE Metanephrops spp.
LOBSTERETTE Nephropsis aculeata
MUREX or MEREX Murex brandaris
MUSSEL Modiolus spp.
MUSSEL Mytilus spp.
MUSSEL Perna canaliculus
OCTOPUS Eledone spp.
 1
 2
OCTOPUS Octopus spp.
 1
 2
OCTOPUS, BLUE-RINGED Hapalochlaena spp.
OYSTER Crassostrea spp.
OYSTER Ostrea spp.
OYSTER Spondylus spp.
OYSTER Tiostrea spp.
PEN SHELL Atrina pectinata
PERIWINKLE Littorina littorea
 2
 2
SCALLOP Aequipecten spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP Amusium spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP Argopecten nucleus
 2
 2
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 43 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
SCALLOP (cont.) Chlamys spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP Euvola spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP Patinopecten yessoensis
 2
 2
SCALLOP Pecten spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP Placopectin magellanicus
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Aequipecten spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Amusium spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Argopecten nucleus
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Chlamys spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Euvola spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Patinopecten yessoensis
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Pecten spp.
 2
 2
SCALLOP , aquacultured Placopectin magellanicus
 2
 2
SCALLOP or BAY SCALLOP Argopecten irradians
 2
 2
SCALLOP , CALICO Argopecten gibbus
 2
 2
SCALLOP or WEATHERVANE Patinopecten caurinus
 2
 2
SEA CUCUMBER Cucumaria spp.
SEA CUCUMBER Holothuria spp.
SEA CUCUMBER Parastichopus spp.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 44 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
SEA CUCUMBER (cont.) Stichopus spp.
SEA CUCUMBER, 
aquacultured
Apostichopus spp.
SEA CUCUMBER, 
aquacultured
Cucumaria spp.
SEA CUCUMBER, 
aquacultured
Holothuria spp.
SEA CUCUMBER, 
aquacultured
Parastichopus spp.
SEA CUCUMBER, 
aquacultured
Stichopus spp.
SEA URCHIN roe Echinus esculentus
SEA URCHIN roe Evechinus chloroticus
SEA URCHIN roe Heliocidaris spp.
SEA URCHIN roe Loxechimus spp.
SEA URCHIN roe Paracentrotus spp.
SEA URCHIN roe Pseudocentrotus spp.
SEA URCHIN roe Strongylocentrotus spp.
SEABOB Xiphopenaeus kroyeri
SEA SQUIRT Styela spp.
SHRIMP Crangon spp.
SHRIMP Farfantepenaeus spp.
SHRIMP Fenneropenaeus spp.
SHRIMP Litopenaeus spp.
SHRIMP Marsupenaeus spp.
SHRIMP Melicertus spp.
SHRIMP Metapenaeus affinis
SHRIMP Palaemon serratus
SHRIMP Palaemonetes vulgaris
SHRIMP Pandalopsis dispar
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 45 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
SHRIMP (cont.) Pandalus spp.
SHRIMP Penaeus spp.
SHRIMP Pleoticus muelleri
SHRIMP Plesionika martia
SHRIMP , aquacultured Crangon spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Exopalaemon styliferus
SHRIMP , aquacultured Farfantepenaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Fenneropenaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Litopenaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Marsupenaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Macrobrachium spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Melicertus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Metapenaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Palaemon serratus
SHRIMP , aquacultured Palaemonetes vulgaris
SHRIMP , aquacultured Pandalopsis dispar
SHRIMP , aquacultured Pandalus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Penaeus spp.
SHRIMP , aquacultured Plesionika martia
SHRIMP , FRESHWATER Macrobrachium spp.
SHRIMP , FRESHWATER, 
aquacultured
Macrobrachium spp.
SHRIMP , ROCK Sicyonia brevirostris
SHRIMP , ROYAL Pleoticus robustus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 46 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
SHRIMP or PINK SHRIMP Pandalus borealis
SHRIMP or PINK SHRIMP P . jordani
SHRIMP or PRAWN Haliporoides sibogae. 4
SNAIL or ESCARGOT Achatina fulica
SNAIL or ESCARGOT Helix pomatia
SNAIL or ESCARGOT Otala spp.
 1
SNAIL, MOON Polinices spp.
SQUID or CALAMARI Berryteuthis magister
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Dosidicus gigas
 1
 2
SQUID or CALAMARI Illex spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Loligo media
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI L. opalescens
SQUID or CALAMARI L. spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Lolliguncula spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Nototodarus spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Ommastrephes spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Rossia macrosoma
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Sepiola rondeleti
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Sepioteuthis spp.
 1
SQUID or CALAMARI Todarodes sagittatus
 1
TOP SHELL Monodonta turbinate. 4
TOP SHELL Turbo cornutus
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 47 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-3. 
POTENTIAL INVERTEBRATE SPECIES-RELATED HAZARDS. 
5
MARKET NAMES LATIN NAMES
Pathogen 
Hazards
CHP 4.
Parasite 
Hazards
CHP 5.
Natural Toxin 
Hazards
CHP 6.
Environmental 
Chemical 
Hazards
CHP 9.
Aquaculture 
Drug 
Hazards
CHP 11.
WHELK or SEA SNAIL Buccinum spp.
WHELK or SEA SNAIL Busycon spp.
WHELK or SEA SNAIL Neptunea spp.
 2
WHELK or SEA SNAIL Zidona dufresnei
FOOTNOTES:
1. This hazard applies where the processor has knowledge or has reason to know that the parasite-containing fish or fishery product will be 
consumed without a process sufficient to kill the parasites, or where the processor represents, labels, or intends for the product to be so 
consumed.
2. This hazard only applies if  the product is marketed uneviscerated.
3. This hazard only applies if  the lobsters are held in pounds.
4. The scientific name for this species has changed since the last edition of  this guidance.
5. You should identify pathogens from the harvest area as a potential species-related hazard if  you know, or have reason to know, that the 
fish will be consumed without a process sufficient to kill pathogens or if  you represent, label, or intend for the product to be consumed. 
(See Chapter 4 for guidance on controlling pathogens from the harvest area.)
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 48 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-4. 
POTENTIAL PROCESS-RELATED HAZARDS. 
Finished Product Food. 1 Package Type.
CHP 12: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Growth - 
Temperature Abuse.
CHP 13: C. botulinum 
Toxin.
CHP 14: S. aureus Toxin 
– Drying.
CHP 15: S. aureus Toxin 
– Batter.
CHP 16: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Cooking or 
Pasteurization.
CHP 17: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Processes 
Designed to Retain Raw 
Product Characteristics.
CHP 18: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Contamination 
After Pasteurization 
and Specialized Cooking 
Processes.
CHP 19: Allergens and
Food Intolerance 
Substances. 4
CHP 20: Metal Inclusion.
CHP 21: Glass Inclusion.
Battered or breaded (including 
surface-browned) raw shrimp, 
finfish, oysters, clams, squid, and 
other fish.
Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, MAP , 
CAP , hermetically sealed).
Battered or breaded (including 
surface-browned) raw shrimp, 
finfish, oysters, clams, squid, and 
other fish.
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Cooked shrimp, crab, lobster, and 
other fish, including cooked meat, 
sections, and whole fish, and 
surimi-based analog products.
Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Cooked shrimp, crab, lobster, and 
other fish, including cooked meat, 
sections, and whole fish, and 
surimi-based analog products.
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Dried fish. All.
6
Fermented, acidified, pickled, 
salted, and LACFs.
All.
2
Fish oil. All.
3
3 - 49 (August 2019). 
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
TABLE 3-4. 
POTENTIAL PROCESS-RELATED HAZARDS. 
Finished Product Food. 1 Package Type.
CHP 12: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Growth - 
Temperature Abuse.
CHP 13: C. botulinum 
Toxin.
CHP 14: S. aureus Toxin 
– Drying.
CHP 15: S. aureus Toxin 
– Batter.
CHP 16: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Cooking or 
Pasteurization.
CHP 17: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Processes 
Designed to Retain Raw 
Product Characteristics.
CHP 18: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Contamination 
After Pasteurization 
and Specialized Cooking 
Processes.
CHP 19: Allergens and
Food Intolerance 
Substances. 4
CHP 20: Metal Inclusion.
CHP 21: Glass Inclusion.
Fully cooked prepared foods. Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Fully cooked prepared foods. Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Pasteurized crab, lobster, and 
other fish, including pasteurized 
surimi-based analog products.
Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Pasteurized crab, lobster, and 
other fish, including pasteurized 
surimi-based analog products.
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Raw fish other than oysters, 
clams, and mussels (finfish and 
non-finfish).
Reduced oxygen packaged (e.g. 
mechanical vacuum, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Raw fish other than oysters, 
clams, and mussels (finfish and 
non-finfish).
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 50 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-4. 
POTENTIAL PROCESS-RELATED HAZARDS. 
Finished Product Food. 1 Package Type.
CHP 12: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Growth - 
Temperature Abuse.
CHP 13: C. botulinum 
Toxin.
CHP 14: S. aureus Toxin 
– Drying.
CHP 15: S. aureus Toxin 
– Batter.
CHP 16: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Cooking or 
Pasteurization.
CHP 17: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Processes 
Designed to Retain Raw 
Product Characteristics.
CHP 18: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Contamination 
After Pasteurization 
and Specialized Cooking 
Processes.
CHP 19: Allergens and
Food Intolerance 
Substances. 4
CHP 20: Metal Inclusion.
CHP 21: Glass Inclusion.
Raw oysters, clams, and mussels. Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, MAP , 
CAP , hermetically sealed, or 
packed in oil).
Raw oysters, clams, and mussels. Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Salads, sandwiches, dips, 
cocktails, and similar seafood 
products prepared from ready-to-
eat fishery products.
Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Salads, sandwiches, dips, 
cocktails, and similar seafood 
products prepared from ready-to-
eat fishery products.
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Smoked fish. Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
5
Smoked fish. Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
5
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 51 (August 2019). 
TABLE 3-4. 
POTENTIAL PROCESS-RELATED HAZARDS. 
Finished Product Food. 1 Package Type.
CHP 12: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Growth - 
Temperature Abuse.
CHP 13: C. botulinum 
Toxin.
CHP 14: S. aureus Toxin 
– Drying.
CHP 15: S. aureus Toxin 
– Batter.
CHP 16: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Cooking or 
Pasteurization.
CHP 17: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Survival 
Through Processes 
Designed to Retain Raw 
Product Characteristics.
CHP 18: Pathogenic 
Bacteria Contamination 
After Pasteurization 
and Specialized Cooking 
Processes.
CHP 19: Allergens and
Food Intolerance 
Substances. 4
CHP 20: Metal Inclusion.
CHP 21: Glass Inclusion.
Stuffed crab, shrimp, finfish, and 
other fish.
Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, MAP , 
CAP , or hermetically sealed).
Stuffed crab, shrimp, finfish, and 
other fish.
Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
Uncooked prepared food. Reduced oxygen packaged 
(e.g., mechanical vacuum, 
steam flush, hot fill, MAP , CAP , 
hermetically sealed, or packed 
in oil).
Uncooked prepared food. Other than reduced oxygen 
packaged.
ACRONYMS: C. botulinum = Clostridium botulinum; S. aureus = Staphylococcus aureus; MAP = modified atmosphere packaging; CAP = controlled atmosphere 
packaging; and LACF = low-acid canned food
FOOTNOTES: 
1. You should include potential hazards from more than one finished product food category if your product fits more than one description.
2. Controls for this hazard need not be included in HACCP plans for shelf-stable acidified and LACFs.  See Thermally Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically Sealed 
Containers regulation (21 CFR 113), called the LACF Regulation in this guidance document, and Acidified Foods regulation (21 CFR 114) for mandatory controls.
3. This hazard does not apply to highly refined fish oil.
4. Applies to finfish and crustacean only in accordance with the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act (FALCPA) of 2004. Molluscan shellfish are not subject to FALCPA.
5. This hazard applies to hot smoked fish.
6. This hazard applies to dried uneviscerated fish in any type of packaging and to other dried fish and fishery products in reduced oxygen packaging used to prevent rehydration. Fish and 
fishery products are defined in 21 CFR 123.3.
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
3 - 52 (August 2019). 
NOTES:
3 - 53 (August 2019). 
Chapter 3: Potential Species-Related and Process-Related Hazards. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD 
This chapter covers the control of pathogens from 
the harvest area for both molluscan shellfish and 
fish other than molluscan shellfish. 
•	 Strategies for control of pathogens 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogens in fish and fishery products. They 
include: 
•	 Control
ling the source (i.e., harvest waters) 
of molluscan shellfish and the time from 
exposure to air (i.e., by harvest or receding 
tide) to refrigeration to control pathogens from 
the harvest area (covered in this chapter); 
•	 Control
ling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	 Control
ling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacterial growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Control
ling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Control
ling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by Chapter 13, for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	 Control
ling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18); 
•	 Managin
g the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
production (covered generally in Chapter 12; 
for Clostridium botulinum, in Chapter 13; and 
for Staphylococcus aureus in hydrated batter 
mixes, in Chapter 15); 
•	 Killing p athogenic bacteria by cooking or 
pasteurization (covered in Chapter 16) or 
retorting (covered by the Thermally Processed 
Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically 
Sealed Containers regulation (hereinafter, the 
Low-Acid Canned Foods (LACF) Regulation), 
21 CFR 113); 
•	 Killing p
athogenic bacteria by processes that 
retain raw product characteristics (covered in 
Chapter 17). 
•	 Molluscan shellfish 
Pathogens found in waters from which molluscan 
shellfish are harvested can cause disease in 
consumers. For the purposes of this guidance, 
molluscan shellfish include: 
(1) oysters; (2) clams; (3) mussels; and (4) scallops, 
except where the final product is the shucked 
adductor muscle only. The pathogens of concern 
include both bacteria (e.g., Vibrio spp., Salmonella 
spp., Shigella spp., and Campylobacter jejuni (C. 
jejuni)) and viruses (e.g., hepatitis A virus and 
norovirus). See Appendix 7 for a description of the 
public health impacts of these pathogens. 
Pathogens from the harvest area are of particular 
concern in molluscan shellfish because (1) 
environments in which molluscan shellfish grow 
are commonly subject to contamination from 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sewage, which may contain pathogens, and 
contamination from naturally occurring bacteria, 
which may also be pathogens; (2) molluscan 
shellfish filter and concentrate pathogens that 
may be present in surrounding waters; and (3) 
molluscan shellfish are often consumed whole, 
either raw or partially cooked. 
Certain pathogens generally originate  
from human or animal fecal sources (e.g.,  
Vibrio cholerae (V. cholerae) O1 and O139,  
Salmonella  spp., Shigella spp.,  C. jejuni, Yersinia  
enterocolitica  (Y. enterocolitica),  hepatitis A virus,  
and norovirus). Other pathogens are naturally  
occurring in certain waters (e.g., Vibrio vulnificus  
(V. vulnificus), Vibrio parahaemolyticus (V.  
parahaemolyticus), and  V. cholerae non-O1 and  
non-O139), and their presence is not associated  
with human or animal fecal sources. 
See Appendix 7 for a description of the public 
health impacts of these pathogens. 
Control of pathogens of human or animal origin 
To minimize the risk of molluscan shellfish 
containing pathogens of human or animal fecal 
origin (e.g., V. cholerae O1 and O139, Salmonella 
spp., Shigella spp., C. jejuni, hepatitis A virus, 
and norovirus), Federal, state, tribal, territorial 
and foreign government agencies, called shellfish 
control authorities, classify waters in which 
molluscan shellfish are found, based, in part, 
on an assessment of water quality. As a result 
of these classifications, molluscan shellfish 
harvesting is allowed from some waters, not 
from others, and only at certain times or under 
certain conditions from others. Shellfish control 
authorities exercise control over the molluscan 
shellfish harvesters to ensure that harvesting 
takes place only when and where it has been 
determined to be safe. 
Other significant elements of shellfish control  
authorities’ efforts to control the safety of  
molluscan shellfish include requirements that  
(1) containers of in-shell molluscan shellfish  
(shellstock) bear a tag that identifies the type  
and quantity of shellfish, the harvester, the  
harvest location, and the date of harvest (21 CFR 
123.28(c)); (2) molluscan shellfish harvesters be 
licensed (note that licensing may not be required 
in all jurisdictions); (3) processors that ship, 
reship, shuck, or repack molluscan shellfish be 
certified; and (4) containers of shucked molluscan 
shellfish bear a label with the processor’s name, 
address, and certification number. 
The controls listed above serve to minimize the 
risk of molluscan shellfish containing pathogens 
of human or animal origin, but do not fully 
eliminate the risk. As a result, consumption 
of raw or undercooked molluscan shellfish 
may not be safe for individuals with certain 
health conditions, such as liver disease; chronic 
alcohol abuse; diabetes; and stomach, blood, 
and immune disorders. For this reason, shellfish 
control authorities require that shellstock 
intended for raw consumption bear a tag that 
instructs retailers to inform their customers that 
consuming raw or undercooked shellfish may 
increase the risk of foodborne illness, especially 
for individuals with certain medical conditions. 
You can also eliminate the hazard of pathogens  
from the harvest area by properly cooking,  
pasteurizing, or retorting the product. Guidance  
on cooking and pasteurizing to control  
pathogenic bacteria is provided in Chapter 16.  
Mandatory retorting controls are described in  
the LACF Regulation (21 CFR 113). It should be  
noted that neither cooking, nor pasteurizing, nor  
retorting will eliminate the hazards of natural  
toxins or environmental chemical contaminants  
and pesticides that also may be associated with  
molluscan shellfish. Appropriate control strategies  
for these hazards are provided in Chapters 6 and  
9. Additionally, the laws and regulations of states  
that  participate  in  the  National  Shellfish  Sanitation  
Program administered by FDA require that all  
molluscan shellfish be harvested from waters  
authorized for harvesting by the shellfish control  
authority, regardless of how it will be processed.  
Control of naturally occurring pathogens 
To minimize the risk of illness from the 
consumption of molluscan shellfish containing 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
76 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
naturally occurring pathogens such as V. 
vulnificus, V. parahaemolyticus, and V. cholerae 
non-O1 and non-O139, shellfish control 
authorities place certain controls on the harvest 
of molluscan shellfish. 
Naturally occurring pathogens may be present in 
relatively low numbers at the time that molluscan 
shellfish are harvested but may increase to more 
hazardous levels if they are exposed to time 
and temperature abuse. To minimize the risk of 
growth of Vibrio spp., shellfish control authorities 
place limits on the time from exposure to air (i.e., 
by harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration. The 
length of time is dependent upon the Average 
Monthly Maximum Air Temperature (AMMAT) or 
the Average Monthly Maximum Water Temperature 
(AMMWT) at the time of harvest, which is 
determined by the shellfish control authority. 
In addition to the above, control for V.  
parahaemolyticus in oysters involves (1) a risk  
evaluation by the shellfish control authority to  
determine whether the risk of V. parahaemolyticus  
illness from the consumption of oysters harvested  
from a growing area(s) in a state is reasonably  
likely to occur; and (2) a determination by  
shellfish control authorities about whether a  
growing area(s) in a state has average monthly  
daytime water temperatures that exceed 60°F  
for waters bordering the Pacific Ocean or 81°F  
for waters bordering the Gulf of Mexico and the  
Atlantic Ocean (New Jersey and south) at times  
during which harvesting occurs. If either of these  
conditions is met, the shellfish control authority  
develops and implements a V. parahaemolyticus  
control plan intended to reduce the incidence of  
V. parahaemolyticus illnesses. As part of the plan,  
shellfish control authorities may (1) temporarily  
close some waters to the harvesting of oysters; (2)  
limit the time from exposure to air (i.e., by harvest  
or receding tide) to refrigeration; (3) temporarily  
permit harvesting of oysters for products that will  
be labeled “For Shucking Only” from some waters;  
or (4) temporarily permit harvesting of oysters for  
processes that retain raw product characteristics  
(covered in Chapter 17) only from some waters.  
As with pathogens of sewage origin, the above 
controls for naturally occurring pathogens help 
minimize the risk from these pathogens in 
molluscan shellfish but do not fully eliminate 
the risk. For this same reason, shellfish control 
authorities require that shellstock intended 
for raw consumption bear a tag containing 
an advisory relative to raw and undercooked 
consumption (described above). 
The controls for Vibrio spp. discussed in this 
chapter apply only to molluscan shellfish if they 
are intended for raw consumption. For example, 
they would not be applied to oyster shellstock 
if tags on the containers of shellstock indicate 
that they must be shucked before consumption. 
Vibrio spp. can be eliminated or reduced to non-
detectable levels by cooking, pasteurizing, and 
retorting. These control mechanisms are widely 
used in the processing of fishery products for the 
control of pathogens. Guidance for these control 
mechanisms can be found in Chapter 16 (cooking 
and pasteurization to control pathogenic bacteria) 
and the LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 113 (retorting). 
Other mechanisms for control of Vibrio spp. include 
processes that are designed to retain the raw 
characteristics of the food, including individual quick 
freezing (IQF) with extended storage, mild heat, 
high hydrostatic pressure, and irradiation. These 
control mechanisms are covered in Chapter 17. 
Appropriate controls to prevent further growth 
of these pathogenic bacteria during processing, 
storage, and transportation between processors 
are discussed in Chapter 12. 
•	 Fish other than molluscan shellfish 
Pathogens from the harvest area may also be a 
potential hazard for fish other than molluscan 
shellfish. Pathogens may be found on raw 
fish as a result of near-shore harvest water 
contamination, poor sanitary practices on the 
harvest vessel, and poor aquacultural practices. 
The pathogens of concern include those 
described above for molluscan shellfish, but also 
include Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia 
coli. See Appendix 7 for a description of the 
public health impacts of these pathogens. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control of pathogens 
The processor can control pathogens by proper 
cooking, pasteurizing, or retorting. Guidance 
for these control mechanisms can be found in 
Chapter 16 (cooking and pasteurizing to kill 
pathogenic bacteria) and the LACF Regulation, 21 
CFR 113 (retorting). 
For many products (e.g., raw fish fillets), there 
is no cooking, pasteurizing, or retorting step 
performed by the processor. For most of these 
products, cooking is performed by the consumer 
or end user before consumption. FDA is not 
aware of any Hazard Analysis Critical Control 
Point (HACCP) controls that exist internationally 
for the control of pathogens in fish and fishery 
products that are customarily fully cooked by 
the consumer or end user before consumption 
other than a rigorous sanitation regime as part 
of a prerequisite program or as part of HACCP 
itself. The Fish and Fishery Products regulation 
(21 CFR 123.11, “Sanitation control procedures”) 
requires such a regime. The proper application 
of sanitation controls is essential because of the 
likelihood that pathogens in seafood products 
can be introduced through poor handling 
practices by the aquaculture producer, the 
harvester, or the processor. 
For some products (e.g., raw fish intended for 
sushi), there is no cooking performed by either the 
processor, or the consumer, or the end user. When 
the processor has knowledge or has reason to 
know that the product will be consumed without 
a process sufficient to kill pathogens of public 
health concern or where the processor represents, 
labels, or intends for the product to be so 
consumed, the processor should control time and 
temperature exposure of the product to prevent 
growth of bacterial pathogens and formation of 
toxins by any bacterial pathogens that may be 
present in the product. Guidance for these controls 
can be found in Chapter 12 and in Chapter 13 (for 
those products where the packaging technique 
creates a reduced oxygen environment). 
Note: The guidance contained in the remainder of this chapter 
applies to receiving controls for molluscan shellfish only. 
DETERMINE WHETHER THIS POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether pathogens from the harvest 
area are a significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that an unsafe level 
of pathogens from the harvest area will be 
introduced at this processing step (e.g., are 
pathogens present in the raw material at an 
unsafe level)? 
Under ordinary circumstances, it would be 
reasonably likely that pathogens of human 
or animal origin from the harvest area could 
enter the process at an unsafe level at the 
receiving step for the following types of fish: 
•	 Raw oysters; 
•	 Raw clams; 
•	 Raw mussels; 
•	 Raw scallops (see information 
provided under “Intended use”).
 
I
n addition: 
•	 Under ordinary circumstances, it would 
be reasonably likely that an unsafe lev
el 
of V. vulnificus (a naturally occurring 
pathogen) could enter the process 
from oysters harvested from areas that 
have been confirmed as the original 
source of oysters associated with two 
or more V. vulnificus illnesses (e.g., 
states bordering the Gulf of Mexico); 
•	 Under ordinary circumstances, it 
would be reasonably likely that an 
unsafe lev
el of V. parahaemolyticus 
could enter the process from oysters 
harvested from an area that meets any 
one of the following conditions: 
The shellfish control authority
has conducted a risk evaluation 
and determined that the risk of V.  
parahaemolyticus illness from the 
consumption of oysters harvested 
° 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from that growing area is reasonably 
likely to occur. Specific guidance for 
determining risk can be found in the 
“National Shellfish Sanitation Program 
Guide for the Control of Molluscan 
Shellfish 2007 Revision”; 
The shellfish control authority has
determined that harvesting occurs 
in the growing area at a time when 
average monthly daytime water 
temperatures exceed 60°F for waters 
bordering the Pacific Ocean and 
81°F for waters bordering the Gulf of 
Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean (New 
Jersey and south), except where a 
more rigorous risk evaluation has 
led the shellfish control authority 
to conclude that the risk of V.  
parahaemolyticus illness from the 
consumption of oysters harvested 
from that growing area is not 
reasonably likely to occur; 
° 
The growing area has been confirmed  
as the original source of oysters  
associated with two or more V.  
parahaemolyticus illnesses in the past  
3 years.  
° 
2.	  Can an unsafe level of pathogens from the 
harvest area that was introduced at the receiving 
step be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable 
level at this processing step? 
Pathogens from the harvest area should 
also be considered a significant hazard at 
any processing step where a measure is 
or can be used to eliminate the pathogens 
that had been introduced at a previous step 
or is adequate to reduce the likelihood of 
occurrence of the hazard to an acceptable 
level. Measures to eliminate pathogens or to 
reduce the likelihood of occurrence of the 
hazard from the harvest area include: 
•	 Checking incoming molluscan 
shellfish to ensure that they are 
properly tagged or labeled; 
•	 Making sure that incoming molluscan 
shellfish are supplied by a licensed 
harvester (where licensing is required 
by law) or by a cer
tified dealer; 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by 
cooking or pasteurizing (covered in 
Chapter 16) or retorting (cov
ered by 
the LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 113). It 
should be noted that neither cooking 
nor retorting will eliminate the 
hazards of natural toxins or chemical 
contamination that also may be 
associated with molluscan shellfish; 
•	 Killing Vibrio spp. by IQF with 
ex
tended storage, mild heat, 
irradiation, or high hydrostatic 
pressure (covered in Chapter 17); 
•	 Minimizing the growth of V. 
cholerae,
 V. parahaemolyticus, and V. 
vulnificus by limiting the time from 
exposure to air (i.e., by harvesting 
or receding tide) to refrigeration; 
•	 Including an advisory on tags on 
containers of molluscan shellstock 
intended for raw consumption or 
on containers of shucked molluscan 
shellfish that instruc
ts retailers to 
inform their customers that consuming 
raw or undercooked shellfish may 
increase the risk of foodborne 
illness, especially for individuals 
with certain medical conditions. 
•	 Intended use 
For most raw molluscan shellfish products, 
you should assume that the product will be 
consumed raw. You should, therefore, identify 
the hazard as significant if it meets the criteria in 
the previous section. 
Where the product consists of scallop adductor 
muscle only, it may be reasonable to assume that 
the product will be cooked before consumption. 
In this case, you would not need to identify 
pathogens from the harvest area as a significant 
hazard. However, if you have knowledge, or have 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reason to kn
ow, that the scallop adductor muscle 
will be consumed without a process sufficient to 
kill pathogens of public health concern or where 
the processor represents, labels, or intends for the 
product to be so consumed, you should control 
time and temperature exposure of the product 
to prevent growth of bacterial pathogens and 
formation of toxins by any bacterial pathogens that 
may be present in the product. Guidance for these 
controls can be found in Chapter 12 and in Chapter 
13 (for those products where the packaging 
technique creates a reduced oxygen environment). 
The controls for V. vulnificus and V. 
parahaemolyticus that are discussed in this chapter 
do not need to be applied to molluscan shellfish 
that are not marketed for raw consumption. For 
example, they need not be applied to oyster 
shellstock from the Gulf of Mexico if tags on the 
containers of shellstock indicate that they must be 
shucked before consumption. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for pathogens from 
the harvest area: 
1.	  Will the product be cooked, pasteurized, or 
retorted sufficiently to kill all bacterial pathogens 
of public health concern during processing in your 
facility? 
a.	  
If it will be, you should identify the cook  
step, pasteurization step, or retorting step  
as the CCP. In this case, you would not  
need to identify the receiving step as a  
CCP for the hazard of pathogens from  
the harvest area. However, note that  
neither cooking, nor pasteurizing, nor  
retorting will eliminate the hazards of  
natural toxins or environmental chemical  
contaminants and pesticides that also may  
be associated with molluscan shellfish.  
Chapters 6 and 9 provide appropriate  
control strategies for these hazards.  
Additionally, the laws and regulations 
of states that participate in the National 
Shellfish Sanitation Program require that 
all molluscan shellfish be harvested from 
waters authorized for harvesting by the 
shellfish control authority, regardless of 
how it will be processed. 
Example: 
A canned clam chowder processor 
should set the CCP for pathogens from 
the harvest area at the retorting step, 
and would not identify the receiving 
step as a CCP for this hazard. 
b.	  If the product will not be cooked, 
pasteurized, or retorted sufficiently to kill 
bacterial pathogens during processing 
in your facility, you should identify the 
receiving step as a CCP where you can 
exercise control over the source of the 
molluscan shellfish and the time from 
exposure to air (i.e., by harvest or receding 
tide) to refrigeration in order to control 
pathogens from the harvest area. If the 
finished product is shellstock intended for 
raw consumption, you should also identify 
the labeling step or the label (tag) receiving 
step as a CCP, because you can ensure that 
the raw consumption advisory is on the tag. 
Example: 
A processor that shucks raw oysters 
and ships a raw product should 
check the tags of incoming shellstock 
(in-shell oysters), the license of the 
harvesters that supply the shellstock, 
and the length of time between 
exposure to air (i.e., by harvest or 
receding tide) and refrigeration. The 
processor should identify the receiving 
step as the CCP for this hazard. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: 
A processor that ships oyster shellstock 
should c
heck the tags of incoming 
shellstock, the license of the harvesters 
that supply the shellstock, the 
harvest location, and the length of 
time between exposure to air (i.e., 
by harvest or receding tide) and 
refrigeration. The processor should 
identify the receiving step as a CCP 
for this hazard. The processor should 
also identify the labeling step as a CCP 
for this hazard and would check for 
the presence of the raw consumption 
advisory on the label or tag. 
This control approach includes two 
control strategies referred to in this 
chapter as “Control Strategy Example 1 
- Source Control” and “Control Strategy 
Example 2 - Shellstock Temperature 
Control.” Refer to Control Strategy 
Example 2 - Shellstock Temperature 
Control” when controls for V. vulnificus  
or V. parahaemolyticus are needed.”  
Conditions that warrant control for these 
pathogens are described below. 
2.	  If the finished product is raw oyster shellstock 
intended for raw consumption and is harvested 
from a state that has been confirmed as the original 
source of oysters associated with two or more V. 
vulnificus illnesses (e.g., the Gulf of Mexico), will it be 
subjected in your plant to a process that is designed 
to retain raw product characteristics (e.g., mild 
heat processing, IQF with extended storage, high 
hydrostatic pressure processing, or irradiation) and is 
sufficient to kill V. vulnificus during processing in your 
facility (i.e., reduced to a non-detectable level of less 
than 30 Most Probable Number per gram (herein 
referred to as 30 MPN/gram), as defined in the 
“National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for the 
Control of Molluscan Shellfish 2007 Revision”)? 
a.	  
If the finished product will be subjected 
to such a process in your facility, you 
should identify the processing step 
that is designed to retain raw product 
characteristics as the CCP for control of  
V. vulnificus. In this case, you would not 
need to identify the receiving step as a 
CCP for the control of V. vulnificus. 
Example: 
A Gulf of Mexico oyster processor 
should set the CCP for V. vulnificus 
at the mild heat processing step and 
would not identify the receiving step 
as a CCP for that pathogen. 
If you choose to follow this approach, 
you should refer to Chapter 17 for further 
guidance. 
b.	  If the finished product will not be 
subjected to a process that is designed 
to retain raw product characteristics and 
is sufficient to kill V. vulnificus during 
processing in your facility, you should 
identify the receiving step as a CCP, 
because you can exercise control over 
the time from exposure to air (i.e., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration 
in order to control V. vulnificus. 
Example: 
A Gulf of Mexico oyster processor 
should set the CCP for V. vulnificus at 
the receiving step. 
This control strategy is referred to as 
“Control Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock 
Temperature Control” Refer to “Control 
Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock 
Temperature Control” when controls for 
V. vulnificus are needed.”  These controls 
should be considered in addition to the 
controls contained in “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Source Control.” If your 
shellfish control authority has developed 
a V. vulnificus control plan, you should 
develop a HACCP plan that is based on 
the requirements of that plan. Elements 
of the control strategy example provided 
in this chapter and in Chapter 17 may be 
useful for development of such a plan. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3.	  If the finished product is raw oyster shellstock 
intended for raw consumption and is harvested 
from an area where: (1) The shellfish control 
authority has conducted a risk evaluation and 
determined that the risk of V. parahaemolyticus 
illness from the consumption of oysters harvested 
from that growing area is reasonably likely 
to occur; (2) the shellfish control authority 
has determined that harvesting occurs in the 
growing area at a time when average monthly 
daytime water temperatures exceed 60°F for 
waters bordering the Pacific Ocean and 81°F 
for waters bordering the Gulf of Mexico and the 
Atlantic Ocean (New Jersey and south); or (3) 
the waters of the state have been confirmed as 
the original source of oysters associated with two 
or more V. parahaemolyticus illnesses in the past 
3 years, will it be subjected in your facility to a 
process that is designed to retain raw product 
characteristics (e.g., mild heat processing, IQF 
with extended storage, high hydrostatic pressure 
processing, or irradiation) and is sufficient to 
kill V. parahaemolyticus (i.e., reduced to a non-
detectable level of less than 30 MPN/gram, 
as defined in the “National Shellfish Sanitation 
Program Guide for the Control of Molluscan 
Shellfish 2007 Revision”)? 
a.	  
If the finished product will be subjected to 
such a process in your facility, you should 
identify the processing step designed to 
retain raw product characteristics as the 
CCP for the control of V. parahaemolyticus. 
In this case, you would not need to 
identify the receiving step as a CCP for the 
control of V. parahaemolyticus. 
Example: 
An oyster processor should set the CCP 
for V. parahaemolyticus at the mild 
heat processing step and would not 
identify the receiving step as a CCP 
for that pathogen. 
If you choose to follow this approach, 
you should refer to Chapter 17 for further 
guidance. 
b.	  If the finished product will not be 
subjected in your facility to a process 
that is designed to retain raw product 
characteristics and is sufficient to kill V. 
parahaemolyticus during processing, 
you should identify the receiving step 
as a CCP, because you can exercise 
control over the time from exposure 
to air (i.e., by harvest or receding tide) 
to refrigeration in order to control V. 
parahaemolyticus or exercise other 
controls as determined by your state’s V. 
parahaemolyticus control plan. 
Example: 
An oyster processor should set the 
CCP for V. parahaemolyticus at the 
receiving step. 
This control strategy is referred to as 
“Control Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock 
Temperature Control.” Refer to “Control 
Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock 
Temperature Control” when controls for 
V. parahaemolyticus are needed.”  These 
controls should be considered in addition 
to the controls contained in “Control 
Strategy Example 1 - Source Control.”  
If your shellfish control authority has 
developed a V. parahaemolyticus control 
plan, you should develop a HACCP plan 
that is based on the requirements of that 
plan. Elements of the control strategy 
examples provided in this chapter 
and in Chapter 17 may be useful for 
development of such a plan. 
Only the primary processor (the processor who 
takes possession of the molluscan shellfish 
from the harvester) should apply the time-to­
refrigeration controls for Vibrio spp. that are 
discussed in this chapter, because this processor 
is in the best position to control the time from 
exposure to air (i.e., by harvest or receding tide) 
to refrigeration. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides three examples 
of control strategies for pathogens from the 
harvest area. You may select a control strategy 
that is different from those which are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations, except 
that some parts of “Control Strategy Example 1 - 
Source Control” are specifically required by the 
Procedures for the Safe and Sanitary Processing 
and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
regulation, 21 CFR 123 (called the Seafood HACCP 
Regulation in this guidance document). 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
Source control  
Shellstock temperature 
control 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1- 
SOURCE CONTROL 
Note: The following controls should be considered in addition to 
those in “Control Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock Temperature 
Control.” 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All containers of shellstock (in-shell 
mollusc
an shellfish) received from a 
harvester must bear a tag that discloses the 
date and place they were harvested (by 
state and site), type and quantity of shellfish, 
and information on the harvester or the 
harvester’s vessel (i.e., the identification 
number assigned to the harvester by the 
shellfish control authority, where applicable, 
or if such identification numbers are not 
assigned, the name of the harvester or 
the name or registration number of the 
harvester’s vessel). For bulk shipments 
of shellstock where the shellstock is not 
containerized, the shellstock must be 
accompanied by a bill of lading or similar 
shipping document that contains the same 
information; 
Note: The source controls listed in this critical limit are required under 
21 CFR 123.28(c). 
OR 
•	 All contai
ners of shellstock received from 
a processor must bear a tag that discloses 
the date and place they were harvested 
(by state and site), the type and quantity of 
shellfish, and the certification number of the 
processor; 
OR 
•	 All contai
ners of shucked molluscan shellfish 
must bear a label that identifies the name, 
address, and certification number of the 
packer or repacker of the product; 
AND 
•	 All mollus
can shellfish must have been 
harvested from waters authorized for 
harvesting by a shellfish control authority. 
For U.S. federal waters, no molluscan 
shellfish may be harvested from waters that 
are closed to harvesting by an agency of the 
federal government; 
AND 
•	 All mollus
can shellfish must be from a 
harvester that is licensed as required (note 
that licensing may not be required in all 
jurisdictions) or from a processor that is 
certified by a shellfish control authority; 
AND 
•	 All finishe
d product shellstock intended 
for raw consumption must bear a tag that 
instructs retailers to inform their customers 
that consuming raw or undercooked shellfish 
may increase the risk of foodborne illness, 
especially for individuals with certain 
medical conditions. 
Note: Only the primary processor, the processor that takes possession 
of the molluscan shellfish from the harvester, needs to apply controls 
relative to the identification of the harvester, the harvester’s license, or 
the approval status of the harvest waters. 
CHAPTER 4: P
athogens From the Harvest Area 
83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Information contained on tags on containers 
of incom
ing shellstock or on the bill 
of lading or similar shipping document 
accompanying bulk shipments of shellstock; 
AND 
•	 Informa
tion on whether the harvest area is 
authorized for harvest by a shellfish control 
authority or information on whether federal 
harvest waters are closed to harvesting by an 
agency of the federal government; 
OR 
•	 Informa
tion contained on labels on 
containers of incoming shucked molluscan 
shellfish; 
AND 
•	 The harv
ester’s license, where applicable; 
AND 
•	 The raw con
sumption advisory on tags on 
containers of finished product shellstock 
intended for raw consumption or the 
raw consumption advisory on labels on 
containers of shucked molluscan shellfish. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Perform visual checks; 
AND 
•	 Ask the she
llfish control authority of the 
state in which your shellstock are harvested 
whether the harvest area is authorized for 
harvest. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For checking incoming tags: 
Every container; ° 
OR 
•	 For checking the bill of lading or similar 
shipping document:
 
Every delivery;
 
° 
OR 
•	 For check
ing incoming labels: 
At least three containers randomly 
selected from every lot;
 
° 
AND
 
•	 For check
ing licenses: 
Every delivery; ° 
AND 
•	 For checking the raw consumption advisory 
on finished product tags or labels: 
Each container of finished product 
shellstock intended for raw consumption 
or at least three containers randomly 
selected from every lot of shucked 
molluscan shellfish. 
° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature o
f the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 Relabel fin
ished product shellstock intended 
for raw consumption that does not bear a tag 
that contains the raw consumption advisory 
or relabel shucked molluscan shellfish that 
does not bear a label that contains the raw 
consumption advisory; 
OR 
•	 Reject an
y incoming tags to be used on 
finished product shellstock intended for 
raw consumption that do not contain the 
raw consumption advisory or reject any 
incoming labels to be used on shucked 
molluscan shellfish that do not contain the 
raw consumption advisory. 
AND 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that harvesting, tagging, 
and/or label manufacturing practices have 
changed; 
OR 
•	 Modify labe
ling practices. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
For shellstock: 
•	 Receiving record that documents: 
Date of harvest; ° 
AND
 
Location of harvest by state and site; 
° 
AND
 
Quantity and type of shellfish;
° 
AND 
Name of the harvester, name or 
registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel, or an identification number issued 
to the harvester by the shellfish control 
authority (for shellstock received directly 
from the harvester only); 
° 
AND 
Number and date of expiration of the 
harvester’s license, where applicable; 
° 
AND
 
Certification number of the shipper,
  
where applicable; 
° 
AND 
For shellstock intended for raw 
consumption, the presence of the raw  
consumption advisory, when  received  
from a certified dealer.   
° 
For shucked molluscan shellfish: 
•	 Receiving record that documents: 
Date of receipt;° 
AND 
° Quantity and type of shellfish; 
AND 
Name and certification number of the 
packer or repacker; 
° 
AND 
Presence of the raw consumption 
advisory. 
° 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action records 
within 1 we
ek of preparation to ensure they are 
complete and any critical limit deviations that 
occurred were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
85 
 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
86 
TABLE 4-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - SOURCE CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Source Control.”  This example illustrates how a primary processor (processor 
that takes possession of the oysters from the harvester) of shellstock oysters, that is, the shellstock shipper, can control pathogens from the harvest area.  It is provided for
illustrative purposes only.  This control strategy should be considered in addition to “Control Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock Temperature Control.”
Pathogens from the harvest area may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
natural toxins, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, and pathogens during processing).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS FOR
EACH PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving 
shellstock 
Pathogens 
from the
harvest area 
All incoming
shellstock must be
tagged with the date
and place of harvest,
type and quantity of
shellfish, and name or 
registration number of 
the harvester’s vessel 
Information on 
incoming shellstock
tags 
Visual
checks 
Every sack Receiving 
employee 
Reject the lot
Discontinue use of the
supplier until evidence 
is obtained that tagging
practices have changed 
Receiving 
record 
Review 
monitoring and
corrective action 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
All shellstock must be
from waters approved 
by the state shellfish 
control authority 
Harvest site on tags
Ask the shellfish
control authority of
the state in which the
shellstock are harvested 
whether the area is
authorized for harvest 
Visual
checks 
Every lot Receiving 
employee 
Reject lots from 
unapproved waters
Discontinue use of the
supplier until evidence is 
obtained that harvesting 
practices have changed 
Receiving 
record 
All shellstock must
be from a licensed
harvester 
Harvester’s license Visual
checks 
Every 
delivery 
Receiving 
employee 
Reject lots from unlicensed 
harvesters
Discontinue use of the
supplier until evidence is 
obtained that the harvester 
has secured a license 
Receiving 
record 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SHELLSTOCK 
TEMPERATURE CONTROL 
Note: The following controls should be considered in addition to 
those in “Control Strategy Example 1 - Source Control.” 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 When controls for neither V. vulnificus nor V.  
parahaemolyticus are needed: 
For AMMAT of less than 66°F (less than 
19°C): 36 hours;
 
° 
OR
 
For AMMAT of 66 to 80°F (19 to 27°C): 
24 hours; 
° 
OR 
For AMMAT of greater than 80°F (greater 
than 27°C): 20 hours; 
° 
Note: AMMAT is determined by the shellfish control authority. 
OR 
When controls for V. vulnificus are needed: •	 
For AMMWT of less than 65°F (less than 
18°C): 36 hours; 
OR
  
For AMMWT of 65 to 74°F (18 to 23°C): 
14 hours; 
° 
° 
OR 
For AMMWT of greater than 74 to 84°F 
(greater than 23 to 29°C): 12 hours; 
° 
OR 
For AMMWT of greater than 84°F (greater 
than 29°C): 10 hours; 
° 
Note: AMMWT is determined by the shellfish control authority.  The 
shellfish control authority may implement time to temperature controls 
that are more stringent than those described here. Processors should 
consult with their shellfish control authority for current requirements. 
OR 
When controls for V. parahaemolyticus  are  
needed: 
•	 
For AMMAT of less than 66°F (less than 
19°C): 36 hours;
 
° 
OR
 
For AMMAT of 66 to 80°F (19 to 27°C): 
° 
12 hours; 
OR 
For AMMAT of greater than 80°F (greater 
than 27°C): 10 hours.  
° 
Note: AMMAT is determined by the shellfish control authority.  The 
shellfish control authority may implement time to temperature controls 
that are more stringent than those described here. Processors should 
consult with their shellfish control authority for current requirements. 
Note: Only the primary processor, the processor that takes possession 
of the molluscan shellfish from the harvester, should apply controls 
for the time from exposure to air (i.e., by harvest or receding tide) to 
refrigeration. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The time shellfish was exposed to air (i.e., by 
harvest or r
eceding tide); 
AND 
•	 The time shel
lstock was placed under 
refrigeration; 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For the time from exposure to air (i.e., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration: 
Obtain information from the shellfish 
control authority; 
° 
OR
 
Check the harvester’s log or tags; 
° 
OR 
Note the time of departure from and 
return to dock; 
° 
OR
 
Ask the harvester.
 ° 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every delivery. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of 
the nature o
f the controls may perform the 
monitoring. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject lots that do not meet the critical limit; 
OR 
•	 Subject t
he shellstock to a cooking, 
pasteurization, retorting, or other process 
that reduces pathogens of public health 
concern to acceptable levels. See Chapters 16 
and 17 and LACF Regulation (21 CFR 113) for 
further guidance; 
OR 
•	 Destroy t
he product; 
OR 
•	 Divert th
e product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that harvesting practices 
have changed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Receiving record that documents: 
Time shellstock is exposed to air (i.e., by 
harvest or receding tide); 
° 
AND 
Time shellstock was placed under 
refrigeration; 
° 
AND
 
AMMWT.
  ° 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
88 
 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
89 
TABLE 4-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SHELLSTOCK TEMPERATURE CONTROL
(V. VULNIFICUS MODEL)
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Shellstock Temperature Control.”  This example illustrates how a primary 
processor (one that takes possession of the oysters from the harvester) of shellstock oysters, that is, the shellstock shipper, can control the pathogen from the harvest area, V. 
vulnificus. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  This control strategy should be considered in addition to “Control Strategy Example 1 - Source Control.”
Pathogens from the harvest area may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
natural toxins, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, and pathogens during processing).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving  
shellstock 
Pathogens from 
the harvest area 
Maximum time
from harvest to 
refrigeration: 
AMMWT < 65°F: 
36 hours
AMMWT 65 to 
74°F: 14 hours
AMMWT >74 to 
84°F: 12 hours;
AMMWT >84ºF:  
10 hours 
Time of 
harvest 
Harvester’s log Every 
delivery 
Receiving 
employee 
Reject lot
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until
evidence is 
obtained that
harvesting 
practices 
have changed 
Receiving 
record 
Review 
monitoring and
corrective 
action 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Time 
placed in
refrigeration 
Visual checks Every 
delivery 
Receiving 
employee
AMMWT = Average Monthly Maximum Water Temperature 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Cook, D. W., J
. C. Bowers, and A. DePaola. 
2002. Density of total and pathogenic (tdh+) 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus in Atlantic and Gulf 
Coast molluscan shellfish at harvest. J. Food 
Prot. 65:1873-1880. 
•	 DePaola, A., L. H. Hopkins, J. T. Peeler, 
B. Wentz, and R. M. McPhearson. 1990. 
Incidence of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in U.S. 
coastal waters and oysters. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 56:2299-2302. 
•	 Frankhauser, R. L., S. S. Monroe, J. S. Noel, 
C. D. Humphrey, J. S. Bresee, U. D. Parashar, 
T. Ando, and R. I. Glass. 2002. Epidemiologic 
and molecular trends of “Norwalk-like 
viruses” associated with outbreaks of 
gastroenteritis in the United States. J. Infect. 
Dis. 186:1-7. 
•	 Motes, M. L., A. DePaola, D. W. Cook, J. E. 
Veazey, J. C. Hunsucker, W. E. Garthright, R. 
J. Blodgett, and S. J. Chirtel. 1998. Influence 
of water temperature and salinity on Vibrio  
vulnificus in northern Gulf and Atlantic 
Coast oysters (Crassostrea virginica). Appl.  
Environ. Microbiol. 64:1459-1465. 
•	 Nishibuchi, M., and A. DePaola. 2005. Vibrio  
species, p. 251-271. In P. M. Fratamico, A. 
K. Bhunia, and J. L. Smith (ed.), Foodborne 
pathogens: microbiology and molecular  
biology. Caister Academic Press, Norfolk, UK. 
•	 Rippey, S. R
. 1994. Infectious diseases 
associated with molluscan shellfish 
consumption. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 7:419-425. 
•	 U.S. Cente
rs for Disease Control and 
Prevention. 2001. “Norwalk-like viruses: 
Public health consequences and outbreak 
management. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 50:1-18. 
•	 U.S. Cente
rs for Disease Control and 
Prevention. February 2010 Norovirus: 
Technical Fact Sheet. Atlanta, GA. http://www. 
cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/revb/gastro/norovirus­
factsheet.htm. 
•	 U.S. Food an
d Drug Administration. 2007. 
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide 
for the control of molluscan shellfish 2007 
revision. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Public Health Service, Food and 
Drug Administration, Division of Seafood 
Safety, College Park, MD. http://www.fda.gov/ 
Food/FoodSafety/Product-SpecificInformation/ 
Seafood/FederalStatePrograms/ 
NationalShellfishSanitationProgram/ 
ucm046353.htm. 
CHAPTER 4: Pathogens From the Harvest Area 
90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD 
Parasites (in the larval stage) consumed in 
uncooked or undercooked seafood can present 
a human health hazard. Among parasites, the 
nematodes or roundworms (Anisakis spp., 
Pseudoterranova spp., Eustrongylides spp., and 
Gnathostoma spp.), cestodes or tapeworms 
(Diphyllobothrium spp.), and trematodes or flukes 
(Chlonorchis sinensis (C. sinensis), Opisthorchis 
spp., Heterophyes spp., Metagonimus spp., 
Nanophyetes salmincola, and Paragonimus spp.) 
are of most concern in seafood. Most of these 
parasites cause mild-to-moderate illness, but 
severe symptoms can occur. Roundworms may 
embed in the intestinal wall and cause nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, and severe abdominal pain 
and sometimes may penetrate the intestine. 
Tapeworms can cause abdominal swelling and 
abdominal cramps and may lead to weight loss 
and anemia. Intestinal flukes (Heterophyes spp., 
Metagonimus spp., and Nanophyetes salmincola) 
may cause abdominal discomfort and diarrhea. 
Some intestinal flukes may also migrate to and 
damage the heart and central nervous system. 
Liver flukes (C. sinensis and Opisthorchis spp.) and 
lung flukes (Paragonimus spp.) may migrate to 
the liver and lung and sometimes cause serious 
problems in other vital organs. 
Some products that have been implicated in human 
parasite infection are the following: ceviche (fish and 
spices marinated in lime juice); lomi lomi (salmon 
marinated in lemon juice, onion, and tomato); 
poisson cru (fish marinated in citrus juice, onion, 
tomato, and coconut milk); herring roe; sashimi 
(slices of raw fish); sushi (pieces of raw fish with rice 
and other ingredients); green herring (lightly brined 
herring); drunken crabs (crabs marinated in wine 
and pepper); cold-smoked fish; and, undercooked 
grilled fish. A survey of U.S. gastroenterologists 
confirmed that seafood-borne parasitic infections 
occur in the United States with sufficient frequency 
to recommend preventive controls during the 
processing of parasite-containing species of fish that 
are intended for raw consumption. 
•	 Controlling parasites 
The process of heating raw fish sufficiently 
to kill bacterial pathogens is also sufficient to 
kill parasites. Guidance concerning cooking 
and pasteurizing to kill bacterial pathogens is 
provided in Chapters 13 (hot smoking) and 
16 (cooking and pasteurization). Regulatory 
requirements for retorting (i.e., thermal processing 
of low acid canned foods) are contained in the 
Thermally Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged 
in Hermetically Sealed Containers regulation, 
21 CFR 113 (hereinafter, the Low-Acid Canned 
Foods (LACF) Regulation). This guidance does not 
provide further information on retorting. 
The effectiveness of freezing to kill parasites 
depends on several factors, including the 
temperature of the freezing process, the length of 
time needed to freeze the fish tissue, the length of 
time the fish is held frozen, the species and source 
of the fish, and the type of parasite present. The 
temperature of the freezing process, the length 
of time the fish is held frozen, and the type of 
parasite appear to be the most important factors. 
For example, tapeworms are more susceptible to 
freezing than are roundworms. Flukes appear to 
be more resistant to freezing than roundworms. 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Freezing a
nd storing at an ambient temperature 
of -4°F (-20°C) or below for 7 days (total time), 
or freezing at an ambient temperature of -31°F 
(-35°C) or below until solid and storing at an 
ambient temperature of -31°F (-35°C) or below for 
15 hours, or freezing at an ambient temperature of 
-31°F (-35°C) or below until solid and storing at an 
ambient temperature of -4°F (-20°C) or below for 
24 hours are sufficient to kill parasites. Note that 
these conditions may not be suitable for freezing 
particularly large fish (e.g., thicker than 6 inches). 
Brining and pickling may reduce the parasite 
hazard in a fish, but they do not eliminate it, 
nor do they minimize it to an acceptable level. 
Nematode larvae have been shown to survive 
28 days in an 80° salinometer brine (21% salt 
by weight). 
Fish that contain parasites in their flesh may also 
contain parasites within their egg sacs (skeins), but 
generally not within the eggs themselves. For this 
reason, eggs that have been removed from the sac 
and rinsed are not likely to contain parasites. 
Trimming away the belly flaps of fish or 
candling and physically removing parasites are 
effective methods for reducing the numbers 
of parasites. However, they do not completely 
eliminate the hazard, nor do they minimize it to 
an acceptable level. 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether parasites are a significant 
hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that parasites will be 
introduced at the receiving step (e.g., do they 
come in with the raw material)? 
Tables 3-2 and 3-3 (Chapter 3) list those  
species for which FDA has information that  
a potential parasite hazard exists. Ordinarily,  
you should identify the receiving step for  
these species as having a significant parasite  
hazard if you know or have reason to know  
that the fish will be consumed without 
thorough cooking by the end user or if you 
represent, label, or intend for the product to 
be consumed in that manner. 
Species of fish not listed with a parasite 
hazard in Tables 3-2 and 3-3 may have a 
parasite hazard that has not been identified 
if these fish are not customarily consumed 
raw or undercooked, or if the hazard occurs 
in certain localized harvest areas that are not 
known commercial sources of fresh fish for 
the U.S. You should consider this possibility 
in your hazard analysis. 
Species that normally have a parasite hazard as 
a result of consuming infected prey apparently 
do not have the same parasite hazard when 
raised only on pelleted feed in an aquaculture 
operation. You need not consider such 
aquacultured fish as having a parasite hazard. 
On the other hand, aquacultured fish that are 
fed processing waste, fresh fish, or plankton 
may have a parasite hazard, even when wild-
caught fish of that species do not normally 
have a parasite hazard. Pellet fed fish that 
sometimes depend on wild-caught prey to 
supplement their diet may have a parasite 
hazard. In addition, fish raised in freshwater 
may have a parasite hazard from trematodes 
because these parasites enter the fish through 
the skin rather than in the food. You should 
verify the culture methods used by your 
aquaculture producers before eliminating 
parasites as a significant hazard. 
If the finished product is fish eggs that have 
been removed from the sac (skein) and rinsed, 
the fish eggs are not reasonably likely to 
contain parasites and you need not consider 
such product as having a parasite hazard. 
However, unrinsed fish eggs or fish eggs 
that remain in the sac ordinarily will have a 
parasite hazard if the species is identified in 
Table 3-2 or 3-3 as having a parasite hazard. 
If you receive the fish frozen and have 
documented assurance from your supplier 
that the fish are frozen in a way that will 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
kill the pa
rasites (e.g., consistent with the 
guidance in this chapter), you do not need to 
identify the hazard of parasites as reasonably 
likely to occur in your product. 
It is not reasonably likely that parasites will 
enter the process at other processing steps. 
2.	 Can the parasite hazard that was introduced at 
an earlier step be eliminated or reduced to an 
acceptable level at this processing step? 
Parasites should be considered a significant 
hazard at any processing step where a 
preventive measure is, or can be, used to 
eliminate the hazard that was introduced at an 
earlier step or to reduce to an acceptable level 
the likelihood of occurrence of the hazard. 
Preventive measures for parasites can include: 
•	 Retorting (covered in 21 CFR 
113, the LA
CF Regulation);
 
•	 Hot smoking (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Cooking and pasteurization 
(covered in Chapter 16); 
•	 Freezing (covered in this chapter). 
•	 Intended use 
If the consumer intends to cook the fish 
thoroughly before consumption, then you do 
not need to consider the hazard significant, even 
if Table 3-2 or 3-3 lists the species as having a 
potential parasite hazard. In order to eliminate 
parasites as a significant hazard when you are 
unsure of the product’s intended use, you should 
obtain documented assurance from the subsequent 
processor, restaurateur, or institutional user (e.g., 
prison or nursing home) that the fish will be 
processed in a way that will kill the parasites. 
Example: 
A primary processor receives whole salmon 
from the harvest vessel and re-ices the fish 
for shipment to a second processor. The 
second processor butchers the fish for sale 
to the sushi market. The primary processor 
has documented assurance that the second 
processor freezes the fish before sale. The 
primary processor would not need to identify 
parasites as a significant hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for parasites: 
1.	  Does the process contain a heating step, such 
as retorting, cooking, or pasteurizing that is 
designed to kill bacterial pathogens? 
a.	  
If the process contains a heating step, 
you should identify the heating step as 
the CCP and would not need to identify 
receiving as a CCP for this hazard. 
See Chapters 13 (Clostridium botulinum 
toxin formation) and 16 (Pathogen 
bacteria survival through cooking or 
pasteurization), and the LACF Regulation 
(21 CFR 113) for further information on 
this control strategy. 
Example: 
A hot-smoked salmon processor 
should set the CCP for parasites at the 
hot-smoking step and would not need 
to identify the receiving step as a CCP 
for this hazard. 
b.	  If the process does not contain a heating 
step, you should identify a freezing 
step as the CCP, and would not need to 
identify receiving as a CCP for this hazard. 
Example: 
A salmon processor that sells the 
finished product for raw consumption 
should identify a freezing step as the 
CCP for parasites. The processor would 
not need to identify the receiving step 
as a CCP for this hazard. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter as 
“Control Strategy Example 1 - Freezing.” 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides an example of 
a control strategy for parasites. It is important 
to note that you may select a control strategy 
that is different from that which is suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following is an example of the control 
strategy included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
Freezing  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - FREEZING 
Set the Critical Limits. 
•	 Freezing and storing at an ambient temperature 
of -4°F (-2
0°C) or below for 7 days (total time); 
OR 
•	 Freezing a
t an ambient temperature of -31°F 
(-35°C) or below until solid and storing at 
an ambient temperature of -31°F (-35°C) or 
below for 15 hours; 
OR 
•	 Freezing a
t an ambient temperature of -31°F 
(-35°C) or below until solid and storing at an 
ambient temperature of -4°F (-20°C) or below 
for 24 hours. 
Note: These conditions may not be suitable for freezing particularly 
large fish (e.g., thicker than 6 inches). It may be necessary for you 
to conduct a study to determine effective control parameters specific 
to your freezing method, fish thickness, fish species, method of 
preparation, and target parasites. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Freezer temperature; 
AND 
•	 Length of ti
me fish is held at freezer temperature 
or held solid frozen, as appropriate: 
For 7-day freezing critical limit: ° 
•	 Starting time of freezing and ending 
time of the frozen storage period; 
OR 
For 15-hour and 24-hour freezing critical 
limits: 
° 
•	 Time when all fish are solid 
frozen and ending time of 
the frozen storage period. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e
.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND 
•	 Perform a vi
sual check of time and physical 
check of solid frozen condition, as appropriate. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For temperature: 
Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
during each freezing or storage period,  
but no less than once per day; 
° 
AND 
•	 For time: 
Each batch, at the beginning and end 
of the freezing or stor
age period, as 
appropriate.  
° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 The device itself performs the monitoring. Any 
person wh
o has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls may perform the visual check of 
the data generated by this device to ensure that 
the critical limits have been met consistently. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Refreeze and store the product at an ambient 
tempera
ture of -4°F (-20°C) or below for 7 
days (total time), or refreeze it at an ambient 
temperature of -31°F (-35°C) or below until solid 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and store a
t an ambient temperature of -31°F 
(-35°C) or below for 15 hours, or refreeze it at an 
ambient temperature of -31°F (-35°C) or below 
until solid and store at an ambient temperature 
of -4°F (-20°C) or below for 24 hours. Note that 
these conditions may not be suitable for freezing 
particularly large fish (e.g., thicker than 6 inches); 
OR 
•	 Destroy or d
ivert the product to a non-raw or 
non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the freezer; 
OR 
•	 Move some or a
ll of the product in the 
freezer to another freezer. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record of continuous temperature monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of vi
sual checks of recorded data. 
AND 
•	 Record of no
tation of the start time and end 
time of the freezing periods; 
AND 
•	 Record of no
tation of the time the fish is 
solid frozen (if appropriate). 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a recordi
ng thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify 
that the factory calibration has not been 
affected. This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading  
on the device with the reading on a  
° 
known accurate reference device (e.g., 
a thermometer traceable to the National 
Institute of Standards and 
Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 Once in serv
ice, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning of 
operations. Less frequent accuracy checks may 
be appropriate if they are recommended by 
the instrument manufacturer and the history 
of use of the instrument in your facility has 
shown that the instrument consistently remains 
accurate for a longer period of time. In addition 
to checking that the device is accurate by one 
of the methods described above, this process 
should include a visual examination of the 
sensor and any attached wires for damage or 
kinks. The device should be checked to ensure 
that it is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate
 the temperature-recording device 
against a known accurate reference device (e.g., 
a NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer. Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, condition, 
past performance, and conditions of use of the 
device. Consistent temperature variations away 
from the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace the 
device (perhaps with a more durable device). 
Calibration should be performed at a minimum 
of two temperatures that bracket the temperature 
range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Review mon
itoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
95 
 
 
 
 
 
­
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
96 
TABLE 5-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - FREEZING
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Freezing.”  This example illustrates how a proces
sor can control parasites in frozen salmon fillets with pin bones removed, where the finished product will be distributed to other processors for the production of refrigerated
lox. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.
Parasites may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2, and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides, aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Freezing Parasites Blast freeze at
-31°F or below 
until solid, and 
hold at -4°F or
below for 24 
hours 
Temperature of 
blast
freezer and
storage freezer 
Recorder 
thermometers 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
at end of each
freezing
process 
Freezer
operator 
Adjust or
repair freezer
Refreeze 
product 
Recorder chart 
with notations
for visual 
temperature 
check, time 
solid frozen,
and time at
end of storage 
period 
Check the
recorder
thermometer 
for accuracy 
and damage
and to ensure
that it is
operational 
before putting 
into service; 
check it daily,
at the
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Time when all 
fish are visually
solid frozen 
and time at
end of storage 
period 
Visual and
physical checks 
Each batch, at 
beginning and
end of storage 
period 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers 
Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may 
see them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 
p.m., Monday through Friday. As of March 29, 
2011, FDA had verified the Web site address for 
the references it makes available as hyperlinks 
from the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA 
is not responsible for any subsequent changes 
to Non-FDA Web site references after March 29, 
2011. 
•	 Adams, A. M., K
. D. Murrell, and J. H. 
Cross. 1997. Parasites of fish and risks to 
public health. Rev. Sci. Tech. Off. Int. Epiz. 
16(2):652-660. 
•	 Adams, A. M., M. N. Ton, M. M. Wekell, 
A. P. MacKenzie, and F. M. Dong. 2005. 
Survival of Anisakis simplex in arrowtooth 
flounder (Atheresthes stomia) during frozen 
storage. J. Food Prot. 68(7):1441-1446. 
•	 American G
astroenterological Association. 
2000. Determination of the incidence of 
gastrointestinal parasitic infections from the 
consumption of raw seafood in the U.S. 
[Report under FDA Contract 223-97-2328 
with Life Sciences Research Office, American 
Society for Nutritional Sciences]. AGA, 
Bethesda, MD. 
•	 Berland, B. 1
961. Nematodes from some 
Norwegian marine fishes. Sarsia 2:1-50. 
•	 Bier, J. W. 1988. Anisakiasis. In A. Balows, W. 
J. Hausler, Jr., M. Ohashi, and A. Turano (ed.),  
Laboratory diagnosis of infectious diseases, 
vol. I. Springler-Verlag, New York, NY. 
•	 Bouree, P.
, A. Paugam, and J. C. Petithory. 
1995. Review - Anisakidosis: report of 25 
cases and review of the literature. Comp. 
Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 18(2):75-84. 
•	 Daniel, R. J
. 1950. A guide to marketable fish. 
Proc. Lpool. Biol. Soc. 57:App1, 68 pp. 
•	 Deardorff
, T. L., and M. L. Kent. 1989. 
Prevalence of larval Anisakis simplex in pen-
reared and wild-caught salmon (Salmonidae) 
from Puget Sound, Washington. J. Wildl. Dis. 
25:416-419. 
•	 Deardorff
, T. L., and R. M. Overstreet. 1990. 
Seafood-transmitted zoonoses in the United 
States: the fish, the dishes and the worms, p. 
211-265. In D. Ward and C. R. Hackney (ed.). 
Microbiology of marine food products, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY. 
•	 Deardorff, T. L., and R. Throm. 1988. 
Commercial blast-freezing of third-stage 
Anisakis simplex larvae encapsulated in 
salmon and rockfish. J. Parasitol. 74(4):600
603. 
­
•	 Deardorff, T. L., M. J. Klicks, M. E. Rosenfeld, 
R. A. Rychlinski, and R. S. Desowitz. 1982. 
Larval ascaroid nematodes from fishes near 
the Hawaiian Islands, with comments on 
pathogenicity experiments. Pac. Sci. 36:187
201. 
­
•	 Deardorff
, T. L., R. B. Raybourne, and R. S. 
Desowitz. 1984. Behavior and viability of 
third-stage larvae of Terranova sp. (Type 
HA) and Anisakis simplex (type I) under 
coolant conditions. J. Food Prot. 47(1):49-52. 
•	 Edgerton
, B. F., L. H. Evans, F. J. Stephens, 
and R. M. Overstreet. 2002. Synopsis of 
freshwater crayfish diseases and commensal 
organisms. Aquaculture 206:57-135. 
•	 Eslami, A., a
nd B. Mokhayer. 1997. Nematode 
larvae of medical importance found in 
market fish in Iran. Pahlavi Med. J. 8:345-348. 
•	 Freeman, R. S., P. F. Stuart, S. J. Cullen, 
A. C. Ritchie, A. Mildon, B. J. Fernandes, 
and R. Bonin. 1976. Fatal human infection 
with mesocercariae of the trematode Alaria 
americana, Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 25(6):803
807. 
­
•	 Gardner, M. A
. 1990. Survival of Anisakis in 
cold-smoked salmon. Can. Inst. Food Sci. 
Technol. J. 23:143-144. 
•	 Hauck, A. K. 1
977. Occurrence and survival 
of the larval nematode Anisakis sp. in the 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
97 
 
flesh of fresh, frozen, brined, and smoked 
Pacific herring, Clupea harengus pallasi, J. 
Parasitol. 63:515-519. 
•	 Jensen, T.
, K. Andersen, and S. des Clers. 
1994. Sealworm (Pseudoterranova decipiens) 
infections in demersal fish from two areas in 
Norway. Can. J. Zool. 72:598-608. 
•	 Karl, H., an
d M. Leinemann. 1989. Viability 
of nematode larvae (Anisakis sp.) in frozen 
herrings. Archiv fur Lebensmittelhygiene. 
40(1):14-16 (in German). 
•	 Lile, N. K., O
. Halvorsen, and W. 
Hemmingsen. 1994. Zoogeographical 
classification of the macroparasite faunas of 
four flatfish species from the northeastern 
Atlantic. Polar Biol. 14(2):137-141. 
•	 Margolis
, L., and J. R. Arthur. 1979. Synopsis 
of the parasites of fishes of Canada. Fish. 
Res. Board Can. Bull. Canadian Department 
of Fisheries and Oceans. 199:1-269. 
•	 McClellan
d, G., R. K. Misra, and D. J. 
Martell. 1990. Larval anisakine nematodes 
in various fish species from Sable Island 
Bank and vicinity, p. 83-118. In W. D. Bowen 
(ed.), Population biology of sealworm 
(Pseudoterranova decipiens) in relation to its 
intermediate and seal hosts. Can. Bull. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci., vol. 222:83-118. 
•	 Ogawa, K. 19
96. Marine parasitology with 
special reference to Japanese fisheries and 
mariculture. Vet. Parasitol. 64:95-105. 
•	 Polyanskii, Y. 1966. The parasitology of 
fish of northern waters of the U.S.S.R. 
Parasites of the fish of the Barents Sea, p. 
158. Transactions of the Zoological Institute 
of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., 
vol. 19 (Translated from Russian by the 
Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 
Jerusalem). 
•	 Punt, A. 194
1. Recherches sur quelques 
nematodes parasites des poissons de la Mer 
du Nord. Mem. Mus. Hist. Nat. Belg. 98:1-110. 
•	 Sakanari
, J. A., and J. H. McKerrow. 1989. 
Anisakiasis. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2:278-284. 
•	 Templema
n, W., H. J. Squires, and A. M. 
Fleming. 1957. Nematodes in the fillets of 
cod and other fishes in Newfoundland and 
neighbouring areas. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 
14:831-897. 
•	 Verhamme
, M. A. M., and C. H. R. Ramboer. 
1988. Anisakiasis caused by herring in 
vinegar: a little known medical problem. Gut. 
29:843-847. 
•	 Williams
on, H. C. 1910. Nematodes in the 
muscle of the cod (Gadus callarias). Rep. 
Fish. Bd. Scot. 28:61-62. 
•	 Williamson, H. C. 1919. The distribution of 
parasite-infected fish. Ann. App. Biol. 6:48
52. 
­
•	 World Healt
h Organization. 1995. Control of 
foodborne trematode infections: report of 
a WHO study group. WHO, Geneva. WHO 
Technical Report Series No. 849. 
CHAPTER 5: Parasites 
98 
CHAPTER 6 : NATURAL TOXINS
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD
Fish and molluscan shellfish contaminated with 
natural toxins from the water in which they lived 
can cause consumer illness. Most of these toxins 
are produced by naturally occurring marine algae 
(phytoplankton). Fish or molluscan shellfish 
consume the algae, or animals that have consumed 
the algae, which causes the toxins to accumulate 
in the fish’s or molluscan shellfish’s flesh. The toxin 
continues to accumulate in the feeding animal’s 
body at each point of consumption and results in 
higher levels further up the food chain. Typically, 
contamination occurs following blooms of the 
toxic algal species; however, toxin contamination 
is possible even when algal concentrations are 
low in certain instances. In addition, there are a 
few natural toxins and harmful compounds, not 
produced by algae, that are specific to certain 
fish species.
There are numerous natural toxins identified 
worldwide; however, there are currently six 
recognized natural toxin poisoning syndromes 
that can occur from consuming contaminated fish 
and fishery products which are:  
•	 amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP), 
•	 azaspiracid shellfish poisoning (AZP),
•	 ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP),
•	 diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP), 
•	 neurotoxic shellfish poisoning (NSP), and
•	 paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP). 
All safety levels identified through guidance 
and regulations for natural toxins may be found 
in “Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in 
Regulations and Guidance” of this Guide; however, 
these levels should not be identified in the HACCP 
plan as they are utilized for confirming illnesses (i.e. 
CFP), inform advisories for at risk harvest areas 
(i.e., CFP) and/or make a determination for harvest 
area closures (i.e., ASP, AZP, DSP, NSP, and PSP.) 
Scombrotoxin fish poisoning, resulting from 
consumption of certain species of fish that have 
been time/temperature abused, is caused by 
spoilage bacteria that form biogenic amines, such 
as histamine, that are not considered natural 
toxins. Refer to Chapter 7 for information related 
to scombrotoxin formation and associated controls.
This chapter has been organized to identify specific 
information regarding the natural toxins and 
controls that are specifically associated with “fish 
other than molluscan shellfish” and “molluscan 
shellfish.” Refer to specific sections appropriately. 
•	 Specific Information Associated with Recognized 
Natural Toxins in Fish Other Than Molluscan 
Shellfish
This section provides information regarding the 
implicated finfish, geographic regions, and illness 
characteristics associated with natural toxins in fish 
other than molluscan shellfish. It is important to 
note that additional geographic locations may occur 
because the distribution of the source algae can 
vary over time. Processors should always be alert 
to the potential for emerging hazards in harvest 
waters and fish sources. 
While CFP is the prominent syndrome associated 
with fish as presented in this section, there are 
other natural toxins that may occur in fish such 
as ASP and PSP toxins. Refer to specific toxins 
in the molluscan shellfish section for information 
regarding other natural toxins that may occur in 
fish other than molluscan shellfish. 
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
6 - 1 (August 2019)
Ciguatera fish poisoning  (from ciguatoxin) is 
commonly related to the consumption of subtropical 
and tropical reef fish which have accumulated 
naturally occurring ciguatoxins through their diet. 
The highest incidences of ciguatoxins occur between 
latitudes 35° north and 35° south, and include areas 
of the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and Atlantic, 
Pacific, and Indian Oceans. Unsafe ciguatoxin levels 
have also been detected from fish populations in 
areas such as the Flower Garden Banks of the Gulf 
of Mexico, and specific areas of Florida, Hawaii, 
Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.  
Ciguatoxins originate from marine algae, are 
transferred through the food web, and accumulate 
in the flesh of reef dwelling fish with the highest 
levels of the toxin being observed in long-lived 
fish-eating predators. These fish may then be 
harvested by commercial or recreational fishermen 
for human consumption. Due to differences in life 
history and diet, not all fish within a given region 
are equally contaminated. Thus, fish caught side 
by side may contain widely differing toxin levels. 
Because ciguatoxic endemic areas are localized, the 
primary seafood processors should recognize and 
avoid purchasing fish from known and/or emerging 
areas of concern.
Many fish species have been associated with CFP 
including but not limited to: barracuda (Family: 
Sphyraenidae), grouper (Family: Serranidae), 
snapper (Family: Lutjanidae), jacks and trevally 
(Family: Carangidae), wrasse (Family: Labridae), 
mackerel (Family: Scombridae), tang (Family: 
Acanthuridae), moray eels (Family: Muraenidae), 
and parrotfish ( Scarus spp.). Ciguatoxins have 
also been found in lionfish (Pterois volitans and 
Pterois miles) collected in waters surrounding the 
U.S. Virgin Islands.
CFP is characterized by gastrointestinal symptoms 
including:  nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.  
Neurological symptoms include: numbness and 
tingling of the lips and extremities; itching of 
hands and feet; joint pain; muscle pain; muscle 
weakness; reversal and sensitivity to temperature; 
dizziness; and vertigo. Cardiovascular symptoms 
may occur and include irregular heartbeat and low 
blood pressure. The onset of symptoms typically 
occurs within 6 hours after consuming toxic fish 
and may persist from several days to weeks. In 
severe cases, some neurological symptoms may 
persist for months and can recur for years. Fatalities 
do not usually occur from CFP; however, isolated 
fatalities have been reported.  
•	 Additional Toxins Found in Fish Other Than 
Molluscan Shellfish
There are naturally occurring toxins in some fish 
species that are either not a result or have not yet 
been proven conclusively to be a result, of marine 
algae such as: clupeotoxin, ichthyohemotoxin, 
gempylotoxin, tetramine, tetrodotoxin, and a 
possible unidentified toxin that causes seafood-
associated rhabdomyolysis (sometimes referred 
to as Haff disease).
Clupeotoxin poisoning  is a rare but severe 
type of seafood poisoning resulting from the 
consumption of certain filter-feeding fish such as 
sardines, herring, and anchovies. The exact cause 
of clupeotoxin poisoning is unknown but it has been 
suggested that the marine toxin palytoxin, produced 
by certain marine algae, contributes to this illness. 
All illnesses as of August 2019 have been linked to 
fish harvested from African, Caribbean, and Indo-
Pacific waters. No suspected cases of clupeotoxin 
poisoning have been linked to fish harvested from 
U.S. waters and no cases of clupeotoxin poisoning 
have occurred in the U.S. Clupeotoxin poisoning is 
associated with a high mortality rate.
Gempylotoxin(s) are wax esters naturally found 
in high concentrations in the meat of escolar 
(Lepidocybium flavobrunneum ) and oilfish 
(Ruvettus pretiosus). These particular wax esters 
are indigestible and may cause diarrhea, abdominal 
cramps, nausea, headache, and vomiting when 
consumed in sufficient quantities or consumed 
in lower quantities by sensitive individuals. The 
exact quantity required to cause these purgative 
effects is not known and appears to vary based 
on individual sensitivities. FDA advises against the 
importation and interstate marketing of these fish. 
Additionally, deep sea fish species, such as orange 
roughy (Hoplostethus atlanticus ), and oreo dory 
(Allocyttus spp., Pseudocyttus spp., Oreosoma 
spp., and Neocyttus spp.) are known to contain 
lesser amounts of the same indigestible wax esters 
as escolar and oilfish. Sensitive individuals may 
also experience symptoms from the consumption 
of these fish. Improperly handled escolar and 
oilfish also have been associated with scombrotoxin 
(histamine) poisoning (Refer to Chapter 7).
Ichthyohemotoxin is found in the blood of a 
variety of different species of eels and considered 
a rare form of food poisoning. Known implicated 
species of eels include Anguilla anguilla, Conger 
conger, and 
Muraena helena. Very little is known 
6 - 2 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
about the nature of the toxin. Ichthyohemotoxin 
manifests in two different forms: 1. Systemic 
(caused by the consumption of fresh, uncooked 
blood); and 2. Topical. Symptoms of the systemic 
form include: diarrhea, bloody stools, nausea, 
vomiting, hypersalivation, skin eruptions, cyanosis, 
apathy, irregular pulse, weakness, paresthesia, 
paralysis, respiratory distress, and possibly 
death. Symptoms from the topical form includes 
a severe inflammatory response when raw eel 
serum comes in contact with eyes or the mouth. 
Oral symptoms consist of burning, redness of 
mucosa and hypersalivation. Ocular contact invokes 
a severe burning sensation and redness of the 
conjunctivae, lacrimination, and swelling of the 
eyelids. Eye irritation may persist for a several 
days. Recovery is usually spontaneous. Care should 
be taken when handling eels. Cooking has been 
known to denature the toxic properties.  
Tetramine is a toxin that is found in the salivary 
glands of whelks ( Neptunia spp.). This hazard 
can be controlled through the removal of the 
glands. Symptoms of tetramine poisoning include: 
double vision, temporary blindness, difficulty 
in focusing, tingling of the fingers, prostration, 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and loss of muscle 
control. Symptoms usually develop within 1 hour 
of consumption.
Tetrodotoxin poisoning is usually associated 
with the consumption of puffer fish from waters of 
the Indo-Pacific Ocean regions. However, several 
reported cases of poisonings, including fatalities, 
involved puffer fish from the Atlantic Ocean, Gulf 
of Mexico, and Gulf of California.  There have been 
no confirmed cases of poisonings from northern 
puffer fish (Sphoeroides maculatus) as of August 
2019, which was once harvested and marketed as 
“sea squab” on the U.S. east coast.  
Puffer fish are also known as fugu, swellfish, bok, 
blowfish, globefish, toadfish, blaasop, or balloonfish, 
depending on the country of origin. Other fish 
species such as xanthid crabs, marine gastropods, 
and goby fish may contain this toxin and have been 
implicated in tetrodotoxin illnesses outside of the 
U.S. Reports of these illnesses have mainly been 
limited to Asia, and involve species unlikely to be 
imported into the U.S. Although strictly regulated, 
it should be noted that there have been several 
cases of tetrodotoxin illness in the U.S. from the 
consumption of illegally imported and commercially 
sold puffer fish products in multiple forms (i.e., 
frozen and dried). 
A restriction exists on the importation of all species 
of puffer fish and fishery products containing 
puffer fish. See “The Exchange of Letters between 
Japan and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
Regarding Puffer Fish” (at website: https://www.
fda.gov/InternationalPrograms/Agreements/
MemorandaofUnderstanding/ucm107601.htm ), 
Import Alert #16-20  (at website:  https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/cms_ia/importalert_37.html), 
and the Regulatory Food Code for Retail Foods  
(at website: https://www.fda.gov/food/retail-
food-protection/fda-food-code) for further details 
regarding importation and control of tetrodotoxin. 
In addition to tetrodotoxin, some puffer fish have 
also been found to be contaminated with PSP toxins, 
which are covered elsewhere in this chapter.  
Tetrodotoxin poisoning is characterized by 
symptoms including: numbness of the lips 
and tongue; tingling sensation in the face and 
extremities; headache; abdominal pain; nausea; 
diarrhea; vomiting; difficulty in walking; paralysis; 
respiratory distress; difficulty in speech; shortness 
of breath; blue or purplish discoloration of the lips 
and skin; lowering of blood pressure; convulsions; 
mental impairment; irregular heartbeat; and death 
in extreme cases. Symptoms usually develop within 
3 hours after consumption of contaminated fish 
and may last from 24 to 48 hours. Death from this 
toxin commonly occurs due to muscle paralysis 
resulting in respiratory failure when ventilatory 
support is not accessible.  
Seafood-associated rhabdomyolysis (some-
times referred to as Haff disease)  was first 
documented in Russia in 1924 with 1,000 cases 
being reported over a 15-year period at that time 
from consuming burbot, eel, and pike. Several cases 
have been reported in the U.S. from the consumption 
of commercially available domestic buffalo fish. 
Other isolated cases have been documented from 
the consumption of crayfish, salmon and imported 
canned mackerel. Internationally, similar cases 
have been reported after the consumption of 
crayfish in China and recently from amberjack and 
yellow jack from Brazil. The cause(s) of seafood-
associated rhabdomyolysis is unknown. Seafood-
associated rhabdomyolysis results in the breakdown 
of skeletal muscle (rhabdomyolysis), with a risk 
of acute kidney failure that develops within 24 
hours after consuming certain fish. FDA is currently 
collecting meal remnants from patients diagnosed 
with seafood-associated rhabdomyolysis to confirm 
the causative species and research the causative 
6 - 3 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
agent(s). 
FDA makes no recommendations in this guidance 
document and has no specific expectations 
with regard to specific controls for clupeotoxin, 
gempylotoxin, ichthyohemotoxin, tetramine, and 
seafood-associated rhabdomyolysis for use in a 
processor’s HACCP plan(s).
Note: Venomous Fish: Care should be taken when 
handling venomous fish such as lionfish, 
scorpion fish and certain species of catfish. 
The potential for harm from consuming the 
venom of any venom-producing fish has not 
been adequately investigated. Currently, 
FDA makes no recommendations in this 
guidance and has no specific guidance for 
food processors with regard to controlling 
the hazard associated with fish venom. Ad-
ditional information regarding venomous fish 
may be found in the “Venomous fish” chap-
ter of the FDA’s Bad Bug Book, which can 
be found at the following website: https://
www.fda.gov/food/foodborne-pathogens/
bad-bug-book-second-edition. 
•	 Specific Information Associated with Recognized 
Natural Toxins in Molluscan Shellfish
This section provides information regarding the 
implicated molluscan shellfish, geographic regions, 
and illness characteristics that have been historically 
associated with natural toxin poisoning syndromes. 
However, it is important to note that historical 
precedent may not be an adequate guide for future 
occurrences regarding geographic locations because 
the distribution of the source algae may vary over 
time. Processors should always be alert to the 
potential for emerging hazards in harvest waters.
ASP, AZP, DSP, NSP, and PSP are not considered 
a likely food safety hazard for scallops if only the 
adductor muscle is consumed. However, products 
such as roe-on scallops and whole scallops do 
present a potential hazard for natural toxins.
Amnesic shellfish poisoning (from domoic acid) 
has been associated with molluscan shellfish, crabs, 
and finfish species. It is most often associated with 
the consumption of bivalve molluscan shellfish 
(e.g., mussels, scallops, and razor clams) from the 
northeast and northwest coasts of North America.  
Domoic acid has also been identified in the viscera 
of lobster, Dungeness crab ( Cancer magister ), 
Tanner crab (Chionoecetes bairdi), and Red Rock 
crab (Cancer productus) in these regions. In recent 
years, levels of domoic acid in Dungeness crab 
on the west coast have exceeded guidance levels 
for this toxin and required harvesting closures. 
Along the west coast of the U.S., domoic acid 
has also been detected in other fish species 
including the sardine (Sardinops sagax), anchovy 
(Engraulis mordax), Pacific sanddab (Citharichthys 
sordidus), chub mackerel ( Scomber japonicas ), 
albacore tuna ( Thunnus alalunga ), jack smelt 
(Atherinopsis californiensis ), and market squid 
(Loligo opalescens). Domoic acid has also been 
detected in several finfish species from the U.S. 
Gulf of Mexico, including plankton-eating fish 
[e.g., white mullet ( Mugil curema ), menhaden 
(Brevoortia partonus), and predatory species, such 
as the Florida pompano (Trachinotus carolinus), 
Gulf kingfish (Menticirrhus littoralis ), and spot 
(Leiostomus xanthurus).] 
ASP is characterized by gastrointestinal symptoms 
including:  nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, 
and diarrhea. These symptoms develop within 24 
hours of consumption. In severe cases, neurological 
symptoms may also occur within 48 hours of 
consumption including:  dizziness, headache, 
seizures, disorientation, short-term memory 
loss, respiratory difficulty, and coma. In severe 
cases, ASP should be considered a potentially life-
threatening illness. There have been no confirmed 
cases of ASP in the U.S. since 1987, following 
the implementation of effective seafood toxin-
monitoring programs.
Azaspiracid shellfish poisoning  (from aza-
spiracids) is associated with consumption of bivalve 
molluscan shellfish. AZP was first recognized 
following a 1995 outbreak of severe gastroenteritis 
in the Netherlands which was linked to the 
consumption of mussels harvested in Ireland. 
Since then, several outbreaks of AZP have been 
reported in Europe. In 2008, two cases of AZP 
were reported in the U.S., and traced to azaspiracid 
contaminated mussels imported from Ireland. AZP 
toxins have recently been reported for the first 
time in Washington State but toxins in excess of 
guidance levels have not been reported in any 
commercially harvested shellfish in the U.S. as of 
August 2019. 
AZP is characterized by severe gastrointestinal 
disorders including: abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. Symptoms develop 
within a few hours following the consumption of 
contaminated shellfish and can persist for several 
days. AZP illness is self-limiting and non-fatal.  
6 - 4 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
Diarrhetic shellfish poisoning  (from okadaic 
acid and dinophysistoxins) is generally associated 
with the consumption of bivalve molluscan shellfish 
with outbreaks being reported worldwide. In 2008, 
DSP toxin levels were documented in excess of the 
guidance level for the first time in several locations 
along the Texas Gulf Coast during a large algal 
bloom which led to the first closure of shellfish 
harvest areas in the U.S. 
DSP and DSP-like illnesses have also been 
associated with shellfish harvested in the Pacific 
northwest of North America, including Puget Sound 
and the west coast of Canada. In addition to Texas 
and Washington State, harvesting closures due to 
DSP toxins have recently occurred in Maine and 
Massachusetts. DSP toxins have now been found 
in shellfish from Alabama, California, Delaware, 
Maryland, and New York; however, not above 
guidance levels in commercial growing areas as 
of August 2019.
DSP is characterized by gastrointestinal symptoms 
including: nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, 
and diarrhea. In addition, headaches and fever 
may also occur and are usually associated with 
dehydration. Symptoms typically develop within 
3 hours after consuming contaminated shellfish 
and may persist for several days. DSP is normally 
considered self-limiting and non-life threatening. 
However, complications could occur as a result of 
severe dehydration in compromised individuals. 
Due to the similarity of symptoms, DSP can be 
misidentified as a bacterial or viral illness.
Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning  (from brev-
etoxins) in the U.S. is generally associated with 
the consumption of bivalve molluscs (clams and 
oysters) from coastal waters of the Gulf of Mexico, 
and, sporadically, along the southern Atlantic coast. 
Gastropods (whelk) harvested from the Florida Gulf 
Coast have also caused NSP. In addition, there have 
been occurrences of the toxins in New Zealand 
shellfish and reports of brevetoxin-producing algae 
in other regions of the world. The largest recorded 
NSP outbreak occurred in New Zealand from 1992 
– 1993; cockles, green shell mussels, and oysters 
were implicated in the outbreak.  
NSP is characterized by gastrointestinal symptoms 
including diarrhea and vomiting. Neurological 
symptoms include: tingling and numbness of the 
lips, tongue, and throat; muscular aches; and 
dizziness. Symptoms develop within a few hours 
of consuming contaminated seafood.  Treatment 
consists mainly of supportive care. 
Paralytic shellfish poisoning (from saxitoxins) 
in the U.S. is most often associated with the 
consumption of bivalve molluscan shellfish (e.g., 
clams, cockles, mussels, oysters, and scallops) 
from the northeast and northwest coastal regions. 
PSP in other parts of the world has been associated 
with molluscan shellfish from tropical to temperate 
waters.  
Bivalve molluscan shellfish can retain the toxin 
for different lengths of time. Some species 
depurate toxins rapidly, whereas others are much 
slower to depurate the toxins. This lengthens the 
period of time they pose a human health risk 
from consumption. For example, most species 
of bivalves can eliminate the toxin within weeks; 
however, others such as Washington butter clams, 
sea scallops, and Atlantic surfclams have been 
known to retain high levels of toxins for months 
to more than five years.
Certain predatory gastropods (e.g., conch, snails, 
and whelk) are also known to accumulate PSP 
toxins by feeding on toxic bivalve molluscs. In 
particular, moon snails and whelk from the northeast 
U.S. are commonly found to contain PSP toxins. 
Gastropods can accumulate high concentrations of 
toxin through their predation on toxic bivalves and 
those concentrations can exceed the levels found 
in the bivalves. Since gastropods accumulate high 
concentrations of the toxins, they are a significant 
risk to humans if consumed when harvested from 
closed waters or waters where PSP has been found. 
Gastropods may also retain the toxin for longer 
periods of time than bivalve molluscan shellfish 
since they are slow to depurate the toxin.
Abalone from South Africa and Spain have been 
reported to contain PSP toxins, although there 
have been no reports of the toxin in abalone 
from U.S. waters. Similarly, PSP toxins have been 
reported in echinoderms (e.g., sea cucumbers) and 
cephalopods (e.g., octopi and squid) harvested for 
human consumption from Australia and Portugal; 
however, there have been no reports of PSP toxins 
in echinoderms or cephalopods from U.S. waters. 
In the U.S., moon snails and whelks from the 
northeast U.S. are commonly found to contain PSP 
toxins. PSP toxins have also been reported in the 
viscera of mackerel (Scomber scombrus), lobster 
(Homarus spp.), Dungeness crab ( Metacarcinus 
magister), Tanner crab (Chionoecetes bairdi), and 
Red Rock crab (Cancer productus). While the viscera 
of mackerel are not usually consumed, the viscera 
of lobsters and crabs may pose a health hazard 
6 - 5 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
if harvested from contaminated waters. In 2008, 
FDA advised against the consumption of American 
lobster tomalley from New England waters due to 
unusually high levels of PSP toxins.  
In 2002, the first reported case of PSP in the U.S. 
from the consumption of puffer fish harvested from 
the central east coast of Florida was identified.  
PSP toxins were detected in southern (Sphoeroides 
nephelus), checkered (Sphoeroides testudineus), 
and bandtail (Sphoeroides spengleri) puffer fish.  As 
a result, Florida Department of State has prohibited 
the taking of puffer fish (genus Sphoeroides) from 
the central east coast of Florida per rule 68B-3.007.  
PSP symptoms can include: vomiting; abdominal 
pain; numbness, burning, or tingling of the face 
and extremities; incoherent speech; loss of 
coordination and muscle paralysis; shortness of 
breath; and in severe cases respiratory paralysis. 
Respiratory paralysis can result in death if ventilator 
support is not provided in a timely manner. The 
onset of symptoms can develop within 2 hours 
post consumption of the PSP toxin contaminated 
seafood. PSP is an extremely potent toxin with a 
high mortality rate in cases where medical support 
is not available.
•	 Additional Toxins Found in Molluscan Shellfish
A number of toxins identified in molluscan shellfish 
have shown toxicity in mouse studies but have not 
been linked to human illnesses. These toxins are 
as follows: 
•	 Cyclic imines have been found in phyto-
plankton and/or molluscan shellfish in 
Canada, Denmark, New Zealand, Norway, 
Scotland, Tunisia, and the U.S.  
•	
Pectenotoxins (PTX) have been detected in 
phytoplankton and/or molluscan shellfish 
in Australia, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, 
Norway, Portugal, Spain, and the U.S.  
•	 Yessotoxins (YTX) have been detected in 
phytoplankton and/or molluscan shellfish 
in Australia, Canada, Italy, Japan, New 
Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom, and 
the U.S.
Note: PTX and YTX have been found to co-
occur with DSP toxins (okadaic acid and 
dinophysistoxins) in shellfish.  
At this time, FDA makes no recommendations 
in this guidance document and has no specific 
expectations with regard to controls for PTX, YTX, 
and cyclic imines for processors’ Hazard Analysis 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) plans.
•	 Natural Toxin Controls
Natural toxins are odorless, tasteless, colorless, 
and temperature stable; therefore, they cannot 
be reliably eliminated through cooking or freezing.  
Amnesic shellfish poisoning and paralytic 
shellfish poisoning in fish other than molluscan 
shellfish: Where ASP or PSP is a potential hazard 
in finfish or crustaceans, states have generally 
closed or restricted fishing areas. Harvesters and 
processors must rely on public announcements, 
postings, and advisories by state authorities to 
avoid harvesting or receiving finfish or crustacean 
from potential unsafe waters. In addition, removal 
and destruction of the viscera may eliminate the 
hazard, and at times is required by state public 
health authorities. For example, eviscerating fish 
or harvesting the adductor muscle from the scallop 
can eliminate the food safety hazards of ASP and/
or PSP.
Ciguatera Fish Poisoning: Due to the nature of 
CFP, a harvest water management system similar to 
the molluscan shellfish system is not an appropriate 
control measure. Some states issue advisories 
identifying endemic areas. For areas without an 
advisory system, fishermen and processors must 
rely on their knowledge to avoid harvesting and 
receiving fish from areas where illnesses have been 
associated. The state or local department of health 
and/or associated departments of fisheries would 
be able to further assist in determining whether 
harvest areas are free of ciguatoxins. 
Guidance levels have been established for Caribbean 
and Pacific CFP toxins (see Appendix 5) but at this 
time, these guidance levels are only used to confirm 
CFP as the cause of illnesses/outbreaks, to establish 
CFP endemic regions, and to determine potential 
CFP-causing species based on the analysis of meal 
remnants involved in cases of CFP.  
Molluscan Shellfish : To minimize the risk of 
molluscan shellfish containing natural toxins from 
the harvest area, state and foreign government 
agencies, called shellfish control authorities, 
manage harvesting activities, based in part on the 
presence of natural toxins in water and shellfish 
meats. Shellfish control authorities may also use 
cell counts of the toxin-forming algae in the harvest 
waters to manage shellfish harvest areas, and 
in areas with no previous history of illnesses. 
6 - 6 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
States must have a Biotoxin Contingency Plan 
that will provide information regarding actions to 
be taken if toxin-forming algae or natural toxins 
are likely or have been detected. Shellfish control 
authorities exercise control over the molluscan 
shellfish harvesters to ensure that harvesting takes 
place only when and where shellfish are determined 
to be safe. In this context, molluscan shellfish 
include oysters, clams, mussels, and scallops, 
except where the scallop product contains only 
the shucked adductor muscle. 
Other significant elements of shellfish control 
authorities’ efforts to manage the harvesting of 
molluscan shellfish include requirements that: 
•	 Molluscan shellfish harvesters be licensed 
(note that licensing may not be required in 
all jurisdictions); 
•	 Processors that ship, reship, shuck, or 
repack molluscan shellfish be certified; 
•	 Containers of molluscan shellfish (shellstock) 
bear a tag with the harvester’s identification 
number, type and quantity of shellfish, date 
of harvest, and harvest location;
AND 
•	 Containers of shucked molluscan shellfish 
bear a label with the processor’s name, 
address, and certification number. 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT 
The following guidance will assist you in determining 
whether natural toxins are considered a significant 
hazard at a processing step:
1. Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of natural 
toxins will be introduced at this processing step 
(e.g., is the natural toxin present in the raw 
material at an unsafe level)?
Tables 3-2 and 3-3 in Chapter 3 identify the 
species of vertebrate and non-vertebrate species 
of fish and molluscan shellfish for which natural 
toxins are known to be a potential hazard. Under 
ordinary circumstances, it would be reasonably 
likely to expect that, without proper controls, 
natural toxins from the harvest area could enter 
the process at unsafe levels at the receiving 
step for those species. There may be other 
circumstances in a geographic area to conclude 
that a particular natural toxin is reasonably 
likely to occur at unsafe levels in those fish or 
molluscan shellfish. The information provided 
in this Guide and the historical occurrence 
of a toxin in the fish or molluscan shellfish, 
where toxin levels exceed established guidance, 
should be utilized to make a determination 
whether these fish and molluscan shellfish 
are harvested and received at the processor. 
Awareness of emerging geographic areas and 
additional species of fish should be monitored 
and acted upon appropriately. Examples of 
fish species recently identified with the hazard 
of natural toxins are lobster, specifically the 
tomalley, containing PSP, anchovies containing 
ASP, and lionfish have been found with levels 
of CFP that can cause illness. 
The following preventive measures for natural 
toxins can be applied as appropriate:  
•	 Fish other than molluscan shellfish:
o Ensuring that incoming fish have not 
been caught in an area from which 
harvesting is prohibited, restricted 
due to the presence of a natural 
toxin, or where an advisory exists 
such as for the presence of CFP. 
•	 Molluscan shellfish:
o Ensuring that incoming molluscan 
shellfish (shellstock) are from an 
Approved or Conditionally Approved 
area in the open status; 
o Ensuring that incoming molluscan 
shellfish are properly tagged or 
labeled; and
o Ensuring that incoming molluscan 
shellfish are supplied by a licensed 
harvester (where licensing is 
required by law) or by a certified 
dealer. 
FDA requires both primary and secondary 
processors of raw molluscan shellfish to 
implement steps at receiving to assure that 
their shellfish originate from safe sources.
2. Can natural toxins that were introduced at un-
safe levels at an earlier step be eliminated or 
reduced to an acceptable level here? 
Even though natural toxins should be considered 
a significant hazard at any processing step, 
they are usually controlled at receiving by 
the primary processor who has the ability 
to directly communicate with the harvester 
6 - 7 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
to identify the harvest locations. FDA also 
requires subsequent processors who receive raw 
molluscan shellfish to consider natural toxins 
as a significant hazard. Similarly, the hazard 
usually may be controlled at receiving where 
the processor has the ability to assure that the 
shellfish has originated from certified facilities. 
Since, natural toxins are not eliminated through 
cooking or freezing, subsequent processing steps 
after receiving the potentially contaminated fish 
are unlikely to eliminate the hazard. Therefore, 
if the fish or molluscan shellfish has been 
identified as potentially containing the hazard 
of natural toxins, and no measures were taken 
to prevent its harvest from endemic areas, 
the processor should not accept the fish or 
molluscan shellfish.  
If a processor chooses to implement controls 
other than at the receiving step, those controls 
must provide an equivalent assurance of safety 
and should be supported by sound scientific 
evidence. There are limited instances where 
processing may in fact be able to remove 
the toxin from the consumed part of the fish 
or molluscan shellfish. These exceptions are 
dependent on the type of fish or molluscan 
shellfish, toxin, and process. Examples include 
but are not limited to eviscerating the fish, 
such as lobsters, crabs, and anchovies, or only 
receiving the adductor muscle of scallops.
•	 Intended Use
In most cases, it is unlikely that the intended use 
of the product would determine whether the hazard 
of natural toxin is significant. An exception is with 
certain products where only the muscle tissue will 
be consumed. For example, where the finished 
product is only the shucked adductor muscle of 
the scallop, it is reasonable to assume that the 
product will not contain natural toxins. In this case, 
you may not need to identify natural toxins as a 
significant hazard.
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS.
The following guidance will assist you in determining 
whether a processing step is a critical control point 
(CCP) for natural toxins.
Where preventive measures during processing, 
such as those described above, are not feasible, 
the hazard of natural toxins should be controlled 
at the receiving step. Two strategies have been 
identified as controls and are referred to in this 
chapter as: 
•	
“Control Strategy Example 1 – Source 
Control for Fish Other Than Molluscan 
Shellfish” and 
•	 “Control Strategy Example 2 – Harvest Area 
Control for Molluscan Shellfish.” 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY.
The following guidance provides two control strategy 
examples for natural toxins. A control strategy 
different from those suggested is acceptable, 
provided it complies with requirements of all 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
Control Strategy May apply 
to primary 
processor
May apply 
to secondary 
processor
Source control for 
fish other than 
molluscan shellfish 
Harvest area control 
for molluscan 
shellfish 
6 - 8 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 – SOURCE 
COUNTROL FOR FISH OTHER THAN MOLLUSCAN 
SHELLFISH
This strategy only applies to primary processors 
(processors that receive or off-load the fish from 
the harvest vessel).
Set Critical Limits.
Suspect fish may not be received by the primary 
processor when harvest locations are:
•	
Closed to fishing by foreign, federal, state, 
tribal, territorial, or local authorities (e.g., 
certain counties in Florida for puffer fish); 
OR
•	
The subject of a consumption advisory 
for ASP, AZP, CFP, DSP, NSP, PSP, or other 
naturally occurring toxins;
OR
•	
Known to be contaminated with ciguatoxin.
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 The status of the harvest location iden-
tified on the harvest vessel records are 
not restricted, subject of an advisory, 
or prohibited from harvest based on 
governmental or other known resources, 
or through declaration stating that the 
harvest area are free from natural toxins.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Obtain assurances through visual exam-
ination of the harvest records for the harvest 
area location, or declaration identifying 
the harvest area location is not under a 
restriction, advisory or prohibition from 
fishing. 
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 Every lot of raw fish received from the 
harvest vessel.
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person with an understanding of the 
nature of the controls and areas of restricted 
fishing due to natural toxin hazard.
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action for a 
product involved in a critical limit deviation:
•	 Reject the lot.
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control of the operation after a critical limit 
deviation: 
•	
Discontinue use of the supplier until evidence 
is obtained that harvesting practices have 
changed through record review of harvest 
locations.
Establish a Recordkeeping System.
•	 Receiving record(s) that documents the 
location and status (e.g., prohibited, 
restricted, or unrestricted) of the harvest 
area. 
Establish Verification Procedures.
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation to 
ensure they are complete and any deviations 
that occurred were addressed appropriately.
•	 Periodically monitor governmental and other 
resources for the most current information 
regarding harvest restrictions, advisories, 
and fishing prohibitions due to natural 
toxins. 
6 - 9 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
TABLE 6-1
Control Strategy Example 1 – SOURCE CONTROL FOR FISH OTHER THAN MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH
This example table illustrates a hypothetical application of the control strategy just presented in “Control Strategy Example 1 – Source Control for Fish Other Than Molluscan Shell-
fish.” The example illustrates the basic control for natural toxins by a primary processor receiving locally harvested grouper. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.
Natural toxins may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential species or process related hazards.   
Example Only: See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
 Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s) Critical Limits
Monitoring 
What
Monitoring 
How
Monitoring 
 
Frequency
Monitoring 
Who Corrective 
Action(s) Records Verification
Receiving 
fresh fish - 
Grouper
Natural 
toxins - 
ciguatoxin
Grouper may 
not be received 
when a harvest 
location is under 
a regulatory or 
other ciguatoxin 
advisory, or for 
which there is 
information from 
a valid scientific 
source that 
ciguatoxin exists
Harvest vessel 
records to 
ensure harvest 
locations are 
not identified 
in a regulatory 
or other 
advisory, or 
locations where 
ciguatoxin exist.
Visual 
examination 
of harvest 
vessel records 
for harvest 
locations and 
compared 
with known 
ciguatoxin 
locations
Records for 
every lot 
of grouper 
received 
Receiving 
employee 
with 
knowledge 
of harvest 
locations 
and hazard
Reject lot
Discontinue use 
of the supplier 
until evidence 
is obtained 
that harvesting 
practices 
have changed 
through 
examination of 
harvest records 
compared to 
location intel
Receiving 
record
Review 
monitoring 
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation
6 - 10 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 – HARVEST 
AREA CONTROL FOR MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH 
Set Critical Limits.
•	 All containers of shellstock received from a 
harvester must bear a tag identifying the: 
o Date and place of harvest (by state 
and site), 
o Type and quality of shellfish, 
AND
o By whom they were harvested (i.e., 
the identification number assigned to 
the harvester by the shellfish control 
authority, where applicable or, if such 
identification numbers are not assigned, 
the name of the harvester or the name 
or registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel); 
OR
•	 For bulk shipments of shellstock where 
the shellstock is not containerized, the 
shellstock must be accompanied by a bill 
of lading or similar shipping document that 
contains the same information;
OR
•	
All containers of shellstock received from a 
processor must bear a tag identifying the 
processor who supplied the shellstock and 
that discloses the: 
o Date and place of harvest (by state 
and site), 
o Type and quantity of shellfish, 
AND 
o The certification number of the 
processor;
OR 
•	 All containers of shucked molluscan shellfish 
must bear a label identifying the packer or 
repacker that identifies the: 
o Name, 
o Address, 
AND  
o Certification number of the packer or 
re-packer of the product;
AND
•	 All molluscan shellfish must have been 
harvested from waters authorized for 
harvesting by a shellfish control authority.  
For U.S. federal waters, no molluscan 
shellfish may be harvested from waters 
that are closed to harvesting by an agency 
of the federal government; 
Note: The National Shellfish Sanitation Program 
(NSSP) allows for harvest of surf clams 
and quahogs in federal waters closed 
due to the risk of PSP utilizing the 
onboard screening dockside testing 
protocol. Refer to the NSSP for specific 
requirements. 
AND
•	 All molluscan shellfish must be from a 
harvester that is licensed as required (note 
that licensing may not be required in all 
jurisdictions) or from a processor that is 
certified by a shellfish control authority.
Note: Both primary and secondary processors 
of molluscan shellfish are required to 
implement source controls in their 
HACCP plans. Only the primary processor 
needs to apply controls relative to the 
identification of the harvester, the 
harvester’s license, or the approval 
status of the harvest waters. The source 
controls listed in this critical limit are 
required under 21 CFR 123.28(c).
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 Information listed on tags, or on the bill 
of lading, or similar shipping document 
accompanying bulk shipments of shellstock 
which includes at a minimum;
o Date of harvest;
o Location of harvest by state and site;
o Quantity and type of shellfish;
o Name of the harvester, name or 
registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel, or an identification number 
issued to the harvester by the shellfish 
control authority (for shellstock received 
directly from the harvester only);
o Number and date of expiration of the 
harvester’s license, where applicable; 
6 - 11 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
AND
o Certification number of the shipper, 
where applicable. 
AND
•	 Receiving information on whether the 
harvest area is authorized for harvest by 
a shellfish control authority or information 
regarding closures of federal harvest waters 
by an agency of the federal government.
AND
•	 The harvester’s license.
OR
•	
Information declared on labels on containers 
of incoming shucked molluscan shellfish 
such as:
o Name of the packer or repacker of the 
product; 
o Address of the packer or repacker of 
the product; 
AND
o The certification number of the packer 
or re-packer of the product.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Visual examination of the harvest area 
location through harvest records to ensure 
they are not from areas under a restriction, 
advisory or prohibition from harvesting;
AND
•	 Obtain assurance from shellfish control 
authorities from the state or country in 
which your shellstock are harvested that 
the harvest area is open for harvest.
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 Checking incoming tags:
o Every container received;
OR
•	 Checking the bill of lading or similar shipping 
document:
o Every delivery received:
OR
•	 Checking incoming labels:
o At least three containers randomly 
selected from every lot received;
AND
•	 Checking licenses: 
o Every delivery received.
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person with an understanding of the 
nature of the controls and closures.
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action for a 
product involved in a critical limit deviation:
•	 Reject the lot.
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control of the operation after a critical limit 
deviation:
•	
Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidence is obtained that harvesting and/
or tagging practices have changed.
Establish a Recordkeeping System.
For shellstock: 
•	 Receiving record(s) that documents:
o Date of harvest; 
o Location of harvest by state and site; 
o Quantity and type of shellfish; 
o Name of the harvester, name of 
registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel, or an identification number 
issued to the harvester by the shellfish 
control authority (for shellstock received 
directly for the harvester only); 
o Number and date of expiration of the 
harvester’s license, where applicable; 
AND
o Certification number of the shipper, 
where applicable. 
For shucked molluscan shellfish: 
•	 Receiving records that documents:
o Date of receipt; 
o Quantity and type of shellfish; 
6 - 12 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
AND
o Name and certification number of the 
packer or re-packer. 
Establish Verification Procedures.
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed.
6 - 13 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
TABLE 6-2
Control Strategy Example 2 – HARVEST AREA CONTROL FOR MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH
This example table illustrates a hypothetical application of the control strategy just presented in “Control Strategy Example 2 – Harvest Area Control for Molluscan Shellfish.”  This 
example illustrates how a primary processor of shellstock oysters, could control natural toxins in shellstock oysters received directly from a harvester. It is provided for illustrative 
purposes only.
Natural toxins may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential species or process related hazards.
Example Only: See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s) Critical Limits
Monitoring 
What
Monitoring 
How
Monitoring 
 
Frequency
Monitoring 
Who Corrective 
Action(s) Records Verification
Receiving 
shellstock
Natural 
toxins
All incoming 
shellstock must be 
tagged with the 
date and place of 
harvest, type and 
quantity of shell-
fish, and name or 
registration num-
ber of the harvest-
er’s vessel
Informa-
tion on 
incoming 
shellstock 
tags
Visual checks Every sack Receiving 
employee
Reject untagged 
sacks;
AND
Discontinue use 
of the supplier 
until evidence 
is obtained 
that tagging 
practices have 
changed
Receiving 
record
Review monitoring 
and corrective action 
records within 1 week 
of preparation
6 - 14 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s) Critical Limits
Monitoring 
What
Monitoring 
How
Monitoring 
 
Frequency
Monitoring 
Who Corrective 
Action(s) Records Verification
Receiving 
shellstock
All shellstock must 
be harvested from 
an Approved or 
Conditionally Ap-
proved area
Harvest 
site on 
tags
Visual checks; 
Ask the shellfish 
control authority 
from the state 
or country in 
which the shell-
stock are har-
vested whether 
the area is 
authorized for 
harvest
Every lot Receiving 
employee
Reject lots from 
unapproved 
waters;
AND
Discontinue use 
of the supplier 
until evidence 
is obtained 
that harvesting 
practices have 
changed
Receiving record
Receiving 
shellstock
All shellstock must 
be from a licensed 
harvester
Harvest-
er’s license 
Visual check 
for number and 
expiration date
Every de-
livery from 
harvester
Receiving 
employee
Reject delivery 
from unlicensed 
harvesters;
AND
Discontinue use 
of the supplier 
until evidence 
is obtained that 
the harvester 
has secured a 
license
6 - 15 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
BIBLIOGRAPHY
We have placed the following references on display in the Division of Dockets Management, Food and 
Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852.  You may see them at that 
location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of June 2018, FDA had verified the Web 
site address for the references it makes available as hyperlinks from the Internet copy of this guidance, 
but FDA is not responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-FDA Web site references after July 2018. 
•	 Abraham, A., E. Jester, H. Granade, S. Plakas, and R. Dickey. 2012. Caribbean ciguatoxin profile in 
raw and cooked fish implicated in ciguatera. Food Chemistry, 131(1);192-198.
•	 Arakawa, O., T. Noguchi, and Y. Onoue. 1995. Paralytic shellfish toxin profiles of xanthid crabs 
Zosimus aeneus and Atergatis floridus collected on reefs of Ishigaki Island. Fish. Sci. 61(4):659−662.
•	 Azziz-Baumgartner, E., Luber, G., Conklin, L., Tosteson, T., Granade, H., Dickey, R., & Backer, L. 
2012. Assessing the Incidence of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning with Two Surveys Conducted in Culebra, 
Puerto Rico, during 2005 and 2006. Environmental Health Perspectives.
•	 Bakes, M. J., N. G. Elliott, G. J. Green, and P. D. Nichols. 1995. Variation in lipid composition of 
some deep-sea fish (Teleostei: Oreosomatidae and Trachichthyidae). Comp. Biochem. Physiol B. 
111(4):633−642.
•	
Braid, H., J. Deeds, S. DeGrasse, J. Wilson, J. Osborne, and R. Hanner. 2011. Preying on commercial 
fisheries and accumulating paralytic shellfish toxins: a dietary analysis of invasive Dosidicus gigas 
(Cephalopoda Ommastrephidae) stranded in Pacific Canada. Marine Biology. DOI 10.1007/s00227-
011-1786-4.
•	
Braidotti, G. June 2014. Seafood and the food-safety Golden Rules. Fisheries Research & Development 
Corporation News. Vol 22 Number 2. 
•	 Bravo, I., J. M. Franco, A. Alonzo, R. Dietrich, and P. Molist. 2001. Cytological study and 
immunohistochemical location of PSP toxins in foot skin of the ormer, Haliotis tuberculata, from the 
Galacian coast (NW Spain). Mar. Biol. 138:709−715.
•	 Bravo, I., M. I. Reyero, E. Cacho, and J. M. Franco. 1999. Paralytic shellfish poisoning in Haliotis 
tuberculata from the Galician coast: geographical distribution, toxicity by lengths and parts of the 
mollusc. Aquat. Toxicol. 46:79−85.
•	 Clifford, M. N., R. Walker, P. Ijomah, J. Wright, C. K. Murray, R. Hardy, E. P. Martlbauer, E. Usleber, 
and G. Terplan. 1993. Do saxitoxin-like substances have a role in scombrotoxicosis? Food Addit. 
Contamin. 9(6):657−667.
•	 Deeds, J., J. Landsberg, S. Etheridge, G. Pitcher, and S. Longan. 2008. Non-Traditional Vectors for 
Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning. Marine Drugs, ISSN: 1660-3397.
•	 Deshpande, S. S. 2002. Handbook of Food Toxicology, p 699-700.
•	 Dickey, R. W. 2008. Ciguatera toxins: chemistry, toxicology, and detection, p. 479 −500. In L. M. 
Botana (ed.), Seafood and freshwater toxins: pharmacology, physiology, and detection, 2nd ed. 
CRC Press/Taylor & Francis. 
•	
Dickey, R.W. and S.M. Plakas. 2010. Ciguatera: A public health perspective. Toxicon 56(2): 123-136. 
•	 Dickey, R.W., S.M. Plakas, E. L. E. Jester, K.R. El Said, J.N. Johannessen, L.J. Flewelling, P. Scott, 
D.G. Hammond, F.M.V.  Dolah, T.A. Leighfield, M-YB Dachraoui, J.S. Ramsdell, R.H. Pierce, M.S. 
Henry, M.A. Poli, C. Walker, J. Kurtz, J. Naar, D.G. Baden, S.M. Musser, K.D. White, P. Truman, A. 
Miller, T.P. Hawryluk, M.M. Wekkell, D. Stirling M.A. Quilliam, J.K. Lee. 2004. Multi-laboratory study 
6 - 16 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
of five methods for determination of brevetoxins in shellfish tissue extracts. Harmful Algae 2002. 
St. Petersburg, FL USA: Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Florida Institute of 
Oceanography, and Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. pp. 300-302.
•	 European Communities. 2002. Commission Decision of 15 March 2002. Laying down rules for the 
implementation of Council Directive 91/492/EEC as regards the maximum levels and the methods 
of analysis of certain marine biotoxins in bivalve molluscs, echinoderms, tunicates and marine 
gastropods. Off. J. Eur. Communities. (2002/225/EC) L 75:62−63.
•	 Florida Department of State. 2004. Prohibition on Take of Puffer Fish in Volusia, Brevard, Indian 
River, St. Lucie, and Martin Counties. Rule 68B-3.007.
•	
Food and Agriculture Organization.  2004.  In, FAO (ed), FAO Food and Nutrition Paper 80.   Risk 
Assessment of Toxins Associated with PSP, DSP, and ASP in Seafood, pp 56-95.  3. Diarrhoeic Shellfish 
Poisoning (DSP).  Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
•	 Food and Drug Administration: Guidance for Industry: “Purchasing Reef Fish Species Associated 
with the Hazard of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning”, March 2013.
•	 Food and Drug Administration: Bad Bug Book, Foodborne Pathogenic Microorganisms and Natural 
Toxins. Second Edition. 2012.
•	 Food Safety Authority of Ireland. August 2006. Risk assessment of azaspiracids (AZAs) in shellfish. 
Food Safety Authority of Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
•	 Friedman, M. A., L. E. Fleming, M. Fernandez, P. Bienfang, K. Schrank, R. Dickey, M. Y. Bottein, L. 
Backer, R. Ayyar, R. Weisman, S. Watkins, R. Granade, and A. Reich. 2008. Ciguatera fish poisoning: 
treatment, prevention, and management. Mar. Drugs 6:456−479.
•	 Friedman, M.A., M. Fernandez, L. Backer, R. Dickey, J. Bernstein, K. Schrank, S. Kibler, W. Stephan, 
M.O. Gribble, P. Bienfang, R. Bowen, S. Degrasse, H. Flores-Quintana, C. Loeffler, R. Weisman, 
D. Blythe, E. Berdalet, D. Ayyare, D. Clarkson-Towsend, K. Swajian, R. Benner, T. Brewer, and 
L.E. Flemming. 2017. An Updated Review of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning: Clinical, Epidemiological, 
Environmental, and Public Health Management. Mar. Drugs 15:1-41.
•	
Hall, S. and G. Strichartz (ed.). 1990. Marine toxins: origin, structure, and molecular pharmacology. 
ACS Symposium Series 418. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC.
•	 Halstead, B. W. 1967. Poisonous and venomous marine animals of the world, vol. 2 - invertebrates. 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
•	 Halstead, B. W. 1988. Poisonous and venomous marine animals of the world, 2nd rev. ed. The 
Darwin Press, Inc., Princeton, NJ.
•	 Hess, P., L. Nguyen, J. Aasen, M. Keogh, N. Keogh, J. Kilcoyne, P. McCarron, and T. Aune. 2005. 
Tissue distribution, effects on cooking, and parameters affecting the extraction of azaspiracids from 
mussels, Mytilus edulis, prior to analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. 
Toxicon. 46:62−71.
•	 Hwang, D-F., and Y-H. Tsai. 1999. Toxins in toxic Taiwanese crabs. Food. Rev. 15(2):145−162.
•	 Hwang, D-F., Y-H. Tsai, T-J. Chai, and S-S Jeng. 1996. Occurrence of tetrodotoxin and paralytic 
shellfish poison in Taiwan crab Zosimus aeneus. Fish. Sci. 62(3):500−501.
•	
James, K. A. C. and B. P. Treloar. 1984. Comparative effects of orange roughy (Hoplostethus atlanticus) 
and snapper (Chrysophrys auratus) in the diets of growing rats. New Zealand J. Sci. 27:295−305.
6 - 17 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
•	 James, K. A. C., D. R. Body, and W. C. Smith. 1986. A nutritional evaluation of orange roughy 
(Hoplostethus atlanticus) using growing pigs. New Zealand J. Tech. 2:219−223.
•	 James, K. J., A. Furey, M. Lehane, H. Ramstad, T. Aune, P. Hovgaard, S. Morris, W. Higman, M. 
Satake, and T. Yasumoto. 2002. First evidence of an extensive northern European distribution of 
azaspiracid poisoning (AZP) toxins in shellfish. Toxicon. 40:909−915.
•	 Kawai, N., Y. Nakayama, S. Matsuoka, and T. Mori. 1985. Lipid composition of various tissues of 
Lepidocybium flavobrunneum. Yukagaku 34:25−31.
•	
Kim, J., U. Tillmann, N. Adams, B. Krock, W. Stutts, J. Deeds, M. Han, and V. Trainer. 2017. Identification 
of Azadinuim species and a new azaspiracid from Azadinium poporum in Puget Sound, Washington 
State, USA. Harmful Algae. 68: 152-167. 
•	 Krishna, N, and J Wood. 2001. It looked like a myocardial infarction after eating crawfish.... Ever 
heard of Haff disease? Louisiana Morbidity Report. May-June2001 Volume 12 Number 3.
•	 Lawrence, J. F., M. Maher, and W. Watson-Wright. 1994. Effect of cooking on the concentration of 
toxins associated with paralytic shellfish poison in lobster hepatopancreas. Toxicon. 33(12):1669−1673.
•	 Lehane, L. 2000. Paralytic shellfish poisoning: a review. National Office of Animal and Plant Health 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Canberra, Australia. 
•	 Lehane, L. and R. J. Lewis. 2000. Ciguatera: recent advances but the risk remains. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 61:91–125.
•	
Ling, K. H., C. W. Cheung, S. W. Cheng, L. Cheng, S-L. Li, P. D. Nichols, R. D. Ward, A. Graham, and 
P. P-H. But. 2008. Rapid detection of oilfish and escolar in fish steaks: a tool to prevent keriorrhea 
episodes. Food Chem. 110:538−546.
•	 Lopes, V., A. Lopes, P. Costa, and R. Rosa. 2013. Cephalopods as Vectors of Harmful Algal Bloom 
Toxins in Marine Food Webs. Marine Drugs.
•	
Martinez, A., J. M. Franco, I. Bravo, M. Mazoy, and E. Cacho. 1993. PSP toxicity in Haliotis tuberculata 
from NW Spain, p. 419−423. In T. J. Smayda and Y. Shimizu (ed.), Toxic phytoplankton blooms in 
the sea. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
•	 National Shellfish Sanitation Program (NSSP): Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish 2013 
Revision. 
•	 Nichols, P. D., B. D. Mooney, and N. G. Elliott. 2001. Unusually high levels of non-saponifiable 
lipids in the fishes escolar and rudderfish. Identification by gas chromatography and thin-layer 
chromatography. J. Chromatogr A 936:183−191.
•	 Noguchi, T. and Y. Hashimoto. 1973. Isolation of tetrodotoxin from a goby Gobius criniger. Toxicon. 
11:305−307.
•	
Ochiai, Y., S. Watabe, K. Hashimoto, H. Narita, Y. Ukishima, and M. Nara. 1984. Biochemical 
identification of two gempylid fish causative of a food poisoning. Bull. Japan. Soc. Sci. Fish. 50:721−725.
•	 Olsen, D., D. Nellis, and R. Wood. 1984. Ciguatera in the Eastern Caribbean. Marine Fisheries Review.   
•	 Perez-Zarza, M. C., V. Ruiz-Gutierrez, and L. Bravo. 1993. Lipid composition of two purgative fish: 
Ruvettus pretiosus and Lepidocybium flavobrunneum. Grasas y Aceites 44:47−52.
•	
Pitcher, G. C., M. Franco, G. J. Doucette, C. L. Powell, and A. Mouton. 2001. Paralytic shellfish poisoning 
in abalone Haliotis midae on the west coast of South Africa. J. Shellfish Res. 20(2):895−904.
6 - 18 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
•	 Poli, M., S. Musser, R. Dickey, P. Eilers, and S. Hall. 2000. Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning and brevetoxin 
metabolites: a case study from Florida. Toxicon. 38:981−993.
•	 Robertson, A., D. Stirling, C. Robillot, L. Llewellyn and A. Negri. 2004. First report of saxitoxin in 
octopi. Toxicon 44 (2004) 765-771.
•	 Saito, T., T. Kohama, K. Ui, and S. Watabe. 2006. Distribution of tetrodotoxin in the xanthid crab 
(Atergatis floridus) collected in the coastal waters of Kanagawa and Wakayama prefectures. Comp. 
Biochem. Physiol. D: Genomics and Proteomics 1(1):158−162.
•	
Satake, M., K. Ofuji, H. Naoki, K. James, A. Furey, T. McMahon, J. Silke, and T. Yasumoto. 1998.  A zaspiracid, 
a new toxin having unique spiro ring assemblies, isolated from Irish mussels, Mytilus edulis. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 120: 9967−9968.
•	 Shui, L. M., K. Chen, K., J. Y. Wang, H. Z. Mei, A. Z. Wang, Y.-H. Lu, and D.-F. Hwang. 2003. 
Tetrodotoxin-associated snail poisoning in Zhoushan: a 25-year retrospective analysis. J. of Food 
Prot. 66(1):110−114.
•	 Sobel, J. and J. Painter. November 1, 2005. Illnesses caused by marine toxins. Food Safety Invited 
Article. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41:1290−1296.
•	
Spark, A. A. and A. A. deWit. 1980. Wax esters in edible fish. Identification of wax esters, p. 45−47. 
In Annual Report of the Fishing Industry Research Institute of South Africa, no. 34. 
•	 Torgersen, T., J. Aasen, and T. Aune. 2005. Diarrhetic Shellfish Poisoning by okadaic acid esters from 
Brown crabs (Cancer pagurus) in Norway. Toxicon 46 572-578.
•	 Toyofuku, H. 2006. FAO/WHO/IOC activities to provide scientific advice on marine biotoxins (research 
report). Mar. Pollut. Bull. 52:1735−1745.
•	 Tsai, Y-H., D-F. Hwang, T-J. Chai, and S. S. Jeng. 1995. Occurrence of tetrodotoxin and paralytic 
shellfish poison in the Taiwanese crab Lophozozymus pictor. Toxicon. 33(12):1669−1673.
•	 Tsai, Y-H., D-F. Hwang, T-J. Chai, and S. S. Jeng. 1996. Occurrence of paralytic shellfish toxin in 
Taiwanese crab Atergatopsis germaini. Toxicon. 34(4):467−474.
•	 Twiner, M. J., N. Rehmann, P. Hess, G. J. Doucette. 2008. Azaspiracid shellfish poisoning: a review 
on the chemistry, ecology, and toxicology with an emphasis on human health impacts. 6:39−72.
•	 Van Egmond, H. P., T. Aune, P. Lassus, G. Speijers, and M. Waldock. 1993. Paralytic and diarrhoeic 
shellfish poisons: occurrence in Europe, toxicity, analysis and regulation. J. Nat. Toxins 2:41−83.
•	 Witers, N. 1988. Marine toxins and venoms. In A. T. Tu (ed.), Handbook of natural toxins, vol. 3. 
Marcel Dekker, New York, NY.
•	 Yasumoto, T., and M. Murata. 1993. Marine toxins. Chem. Rev. 93:1897−1909.
6 - 19 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
NOTES:
6 - 20 (August 2019)
Chapter 6: Natural Toxins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not create  
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an alternative  
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want to discuss  
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot identify the  
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.  
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Scombrotoxin (histamine) formation as a result 
of time and temperature abuse of certain species 
of fish can cause consumer illness.  The illness 
is closely linked to the development of histamine 
in these fish.  In most cases, histamine levels in 
illness-causing fish have been above 200 ppm, 
often above 500 ppm.  However, there is some 
evidence that other chemicals (e.g., biogenic 
amines such as putrescine and cadaverine) may 
also play a role in the illness.  The possible role of 
these chemicals in consumer illness is the subject 
of Chapter 8. 
Seafood-related scombrotoxin poisoning is 
primarily associated with the consumption of 
tuna, mahi-mahi, marlin, and bluefish.  Table 3-2 
(Chapter 3) identifies other species that are also 
capable of developing elevated levels of histamine 
when temperature abuse occurs. 
The illness caused by the consumption of fish 
in which scombrotoxin has formed is most 
appropriately referred to as “scombrotoxin 
poisoning.”  The illness has historically been 
known by other names.  Originally, the illness 
was termed “scombroid poisoning” because of its 
association with fish in the families Scombridae 
and Scomberesocidae.  However, other species 
of fish are now known to cause the illness.  The 
terms “histamine poisoning” and “histamine fish 
poisoning” have also been applied to the illness. 
However, because biogenic amines other than 
histamine have been associated with the illness, 
these terms also present difficulties. Nonetheless, 
this chapter refers to control measures to prevent 
the formation of histamine.  It is expected 
that the methods of control used to inhibit the 
bacteria that result in histamine formation will 
also inhibit the bacteria that produce other 
biogenic amines. 
Symptoms of scombrotoxin poisoning include 
tingling or burning in or around the mouth or 
throat; rash or hives on the upper body; drop in 
blood pressure; headache; dizziness; itching of the 
skin; nausea; vomiting; diarrhea; asthmatic-like 
constriction of the air passage; heart palpitation; 
and respiratory distress.  Symptoms usually 
occur within a few minutes to a few hours of 
consumption and last from 12 hours to a few days. 
•	 Scombrotoxin (histamine) formation 
Certain bacteria produce the enzyme histidine 
decarboxylase during growth.  This enzyme reacts 
with histidine, a naturally occurring amino acid 
that is present in larger quantities in some fish 
than in others.  The result is the formation of 
scombrotoxin (histamine). 
Histamine-forming bacteria are capable of growing 
and producing histamine over a wide temperature 
range.  Growth of histamine is more rapid, however, 
at high-abuse temperatures (e.g., 70°F (21.1°C) 
or higher) than at moderate-abuse temperatures 
(e.g., 45°F (7.2°C)).  Growth is particularly rapid 
at temperatures near 90°F (32.2°C).  Histamine is 
more commonly the result of high temperature 
spoilage than of long-term, relatively low-
temperature spoilage, which is commonly associated 
with organoleptically detectable decomposition. 
Nonetheless, there are a number of opportunities 
for histamine to form under more moderate-abuse 
temperature conditions. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once the enzyme histidine decarboxylase is 
present in the fish, it can continue to produce 
histamine in the fish even if the bacteria are not 
active.  The enzyme can be active at or near 
refrigeration temperatures.  The enzyme remains 
stable while in the frozen state and may be 
reactivated very rapidly after thawing. 
Freezing may inactivate some of the enzyme-
forming bacteria.  Both the enzyme and 
the bacteria can be inactivated by cooking. 
However, once histamine is produced, it cannot 
be eliminated by heat (including retorting) or 
freezing.  After cooking, recontamination of 
the fish with the enzyme-producing bacteria 
is necessary for additional histamine to form. 
For these reasons, histamine development is 
more likely in raw, unfrozen fish but should 
not be discounted in other product forms of 
scombrotoxin-forming fish species. 
The kinds of bacteria that are associated with 
histamine development are commonly present in 
the saltwater environment.  They naturally exist 
on the gills, on external surfaces, and in the gut 
of live, saltwater fish, with no harm to the fish. 
Upon death, the defense mechanisms of the fish 
no longer inhibit bacterial growth in the muscle 
tissue, and histamine-forming bacteria may start 
to grow, resulting in the production of histamine. 
Evisceration and removal of the gills may reduce, 
but not eliminate, the number of histamine-
forming bacteria.  Packing of the visceral cavity 
with ice may aid in chilling large fish in which 
internal muscle temperatures are not easily 
reduced.  However, when done improperly, these 
steps may accelerate the process of histamine 
development in the edible portions of the fish by 
spreading the bacteria from the visceral cavity to 
the flesh of the fish. 
With some harvesting practices, such as 
longlining and gillnetting, death may occur many 
hours before the fish is removed from the water. 
Under the worst conditions, histamine formation 
can already be underway before the fish is 
brought onboard the vessel.  This condition 
can be further aggravated with certain tuna 
species that generate heat, resulting in internal 
temperatures that may exceed environmental 
temperatures and increasing the likelihood 
of conditions favorable to growth of enzyme-
forming bacteria. 
The potential for histamine formation is increased 
when the scombrotoxin-forming fish muscle is in 
direct contact with the enzyme-forming bacteria. 
This direct contact occurs when the fish are 
processed (e.g., butchering or filleting) and can 
be particularly problematic when the surface-to­
volume ratio of the exposed fish muscle is large, 
such as minced tuna for salads.  Even when such 
products are prepared from canned or pouch 
retorted fish, recontamination can occur during 
salad preparation, especially with the addition of 
raw ingredients.  The mixing in of the bacteria 
throughout the product and the high surface-to­
volume ratio can result in substantial histamine 
formation if time and temperature abuse occurs. 
At least some of the histamine-forming bacteria 
are halotolerant (salt tolerant) or halophilic (salt 
loving).  Some are more capable of producing 
histamine at elevated acidity (low pH).  As a 
result, histamine formation is possible during 
processes such as brining, salting, smoking, 
drying, fermenting, and pickling until the product 
is fully shelf-stable.  Refrigeration can be used 
to inhibit histamine formation during these 
processes. 
A number of the histamine-forming bacteria are 
facultative anaerobes that can grow in reduced 
oxygen environments.  As a result, reduced 
oxygen packaging (e.g., vacuum packaging, 
modified atmosphere packaging, and controlled 
atmosphere packaging) should not be viewed as 
inhibitory to histamine formation. 
Histamine is water soluble (dissolves in water) 
and would not be expected in significant 
quantity in products such as fish oil that do not 
have a water component.  However, histamine 
could be present in products such as fish protein 
concentrate that are prepared from the muscle or 
aqueous (water-based) components of fish tissue. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
•	 Controlling scombrotoxin (histamine) 
formation 
Rapid chilling of scombrotoxin-forming fish 
immediately after death is the most important 
element in any strategy for preventing the 
formation of scombrotoxin (histamine), especially 
for fish that are exposed to warm waters or air, 
and for tunas which generate heat in their tissues. 
Some recommendations follow: 
•	 Fish expose
d to air or water temperatures 
above 83°F (28.3°C) should be placed in 
ice, or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, 
or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon as 
possible after harvest, but not more than 6 
hours from the time of death; or 
•	 Fish expose
d to air and water temperatures 
of 83°F (28.3°C) or less should be placed 
in ice, or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, 
or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon as 
possible after harvest, but not more than 9 
hours from the time of death; or 
•	 Fish that a
re gilled and gutted before chilling 
should be placed in ice, or in refrigerated 
seawater, ice slurry, or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) 
or less, as soon as possible after harvest, but 
not more than 12 hours from the time of 
death; or 
•	 Fish that a
re harvested under conditions that 
expose dead fish to harvest waters of 65°F 
(18.3°C) or less for 24 hours or less should 
be placed in ice, or in refrigerated seawater, 
ice slurry, or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as 
soon as possible after harvest, but not more 
than the time limits listed above, with the 
time period starting when the fish leave the 
65°F (18.3°C) or less environment. 
Note: If the actual time of death is not known, an estimated time 
of the first fish death in the set may be used (e.g., the time the 
deployment of a longline begins). 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
115 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
116
 TABLE 7-1
RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM TIME TO GET SCOMBROTOXIN-FORMING FISH INTO CHILLING MEDIUM ONBOARD HARVEST VESSELS TO PREVENT 
SCOMBROTOXIN FORMATION1 
WHEN… THEN, THE MAXIMUM TIME IN HOURS TO GET THE FISH INTO CHILLING MEDIUM (≤ 40°F) FROM
THE TIME OF… 
THE WATER 
TEMPERATURE (°F) IS… 
AND THE AIR TEMPERATURE (°F) IS… DEATH OF THE FISH OR EARLIEST ESTIMATED 
TIME OF DEATH IS… 
ONBOARD LANDING IS… 
FOR UNEVISCERATED FISH:
> 65 > 83 6 -­
> 83 Any 6 -­
> 65, but ≤ 83 ≤ 83 9 -­
≤ 652 > 83 -­ 6 
≤ 652 ≤ 83 -­ 9 
FOR FISH EVISCERATED ONBOARD BEFORE CHILLING:
> 65 Any 12 -­
≤ 652 Any -­ 12 
1. This table is a summary of the preceding recommendations.  For complete understanding of the recommendations, refer to the text above.
2. Provided exposure of the fish in the water at 65°F or less is ≤ 24 hours. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The con
trols listed above for onboard chilling  
will prevent the rapid formation of the enzyme  
histidine decarboxylase.  Once this enzyme is  
formed, control of the hazard is unlikely.  It is  
important to recognize that the parameters listed  
above are intended to control scombrotoxin  
formation; these criteria may not effectively control  
the activity of other spoilage organisms, raising  
the possibility that fish may become adulterated  
because of decomposition (not a food safety  
hazard covered by the Procedures for the Safe and  
Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and  
Fishery Products regulation, 21 CFR 123, called  
the Seafood Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point  
(HACCP) Regulation in this guidance document)  
before scombrotoxin (histamine) is formed. 
•	 The size of t
he fish; 
•	 The chill
ing method: 
Further chilling toward the freezing point is also 
desirable to safeguard against the less common, 
longer term, lower temperature development of 
histamine.  Additionally, the shelf life and quality 
of the fish are significantly compromised when 
product temperature is not rapidly dropped to 
near freezing. 
Although it may be possible for a harvest vessel 
to completely avoid onboard chilling and still 
deliver fish to the processor within the time and 
temperature limitations recommended above 
for chilling the fish, this practice is discouraged. 
Failure to chill onboard may permit bacteria and 
enzymes, including those that form scombrotoxin 
(histamine), to increase unnecessarily. 
The time required to lower the internal 
temperature of fish after capture will be 
dependent upon a number of factors, including: 
•	 The harve
st method: 
Delays in removing fish from the water 
after capture, such as those captured by 
a longline, may significantly limit the 
amount of time lef
t for chilling and may 
allow some fish to heat up; 
˚ 
Large quantities of fish captured in a 
single fishing set, such as those captured 
on a purse seiner, may exceed a vessel’s 
ability to rapidly chill the product; 
˚ 
Ice alone takes longer to chill fish 
than does an ice slurry or recirculated 
refrigerated seawater or brine, a 
consequence of reduced contact area 
and heat transfer; 
˚ 
The quantity of ice or ice slurry and 
the capacity of refrigerated seawater or 
brine systems, as well as the physical 
arrangement of the fish in the chilling 
media, should be suitable for the 
quantity of catch.  
˚ 
Once chil
led, the scombrotoxin-forming fish 
should be maintained as close as possible to the 
freezing point (or held frozen) until it is consumed. 
Exposure to temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) 
should be minimized.  The amount of post-harvest 
time at elevated temperatures (after proper chilling 
onboard the harvest vessel) to which a fish can 
be exposed (e.g., during processing, storage, and 
distribution) without adverse effects is dependent 
primarily upon whether the fish was previously 
frozen (e.g., onboard the harvest vessel) or heat 
processed sufficiently to destroy scombrotoxin­
forming bacteria. 
Extended frozen storage (e.g., 24 weeks) or 
cooking minimizes the risk of additional 
histamine development by inactivating the 
enzyme-forming bacteria and, in the case 
of cooking, the enzyme itself. As previously 
mentioned, recontamination with enzyme-
forming bacteria and significant temperature 
abuse is necessary for histamine formation 
following cooking.  Such recontamination may 
not be likely if the fish is processed under a 
conscientious sanitation program.  However, 
addition of raw ingredients, employee contact, 
or poor sanitary conditions could reintroduce 
contamination.  Further guidance is provided 
below: 
•	 Scombro
toxin-forming fish that have not 
been previously frozen or heat processed 
sufficiently to destroy scombrotoxin­
forming bacteria should not be exposed to 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
117 
 
 
 
 
 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for: 
More than 4 hours, cumulatively, if any 
portion of that time is at temperatures 
above 70°F (21.1°C); or 
˚ 
More than 8 hours, cumulatively, as 
long as no portion of that time is at 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C). 
˚ 
•	 Scombro
toxin-forming fish that have 
been previously frozen, or heat processed 
sufficiently to destroy scombrotoxin-forming 
bacteria and are subsequently handled in 
a manner in which there is an opportunity 
for recontamination with scombrotoxin­
forming bacteria (e.g., contact with fresh 
fish, employees, or introduction of raw 
ingredients), should not be exposed to 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for: 
 More than 12 hours, cumulatively, if any 
portion of that time is at temperatures 
above 70°F (21.1°C); or 
˚
More than 24 hours, cumulatively, as 
long as no portion of that time is at 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C); 
˚ 
•	 Scombro
toxin-forming fish that have been 
heat processed sufficiently to destroy 
scombrotoxin-forming bacteria and enzymes 
and are not subsequently handled in a 
manner in which there is an opportunity for 
recontamination with scombrotoxin-forming 
bacteria (e.g., no contact with fresh fish, 
employees, or raw ingredients) are at low 
risk for further scombrotoxin (histamine) 
development. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
118 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
119 
TABLE 7-2
RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM HOURS OF EXPOSURE OF SCOMBROTOXIN-FORMING FISH TO AMBIENT TEMPERATURES GREATER THAN 
40°F TO PREVENT SCOMBROTOXIN FORMATION AFTER PROPER ONBOARD HARVEST VESSEL CHILLING, FOR DIFFERING TEMPERATURE 
EXPOSURE AND PREVIOUS PROCESSING CONDITIONS1 
1. This table is a summary of the preceding recommendations. For complete understanding of the recommendations, refer to the text above. 
WHEN THE AMBIENT TEMPERATURE (°F) OF EXPOSURE IS… THEN, THE MAXIMUM HOURS OF EXPOSURE TIME FOR…
Fresh fish (not heat processed
or previously frozen) is … 
Previously frozen fish, or heat processed fish (that has been
exposed to possible recontamination), is…
> 70 AT ANY TIME ≤ 4 ≤ 12 
≤ 70 DURING ENTIRE EXPOSURE ≤ 8 ≤ 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Detection 
Sensory evaluation 
Sensory evaluation is generally used to screen 
fish for indicators of spoilage that develop when 
the fish is exposed to time and temperature 
abuse.  Odor in particular is an effective means 
of detecting fish that have been subjected to a 
variety of abusive conditions.  However, odors of 
decomposition that are typical of relatively low 
temperature spoilage may not be present if the 
fish has undergone high temperature spoilage. 
This condition makes sensory examination 
alone an ineffective control for preventing 
scombrotoxin (histamine) formation. 
It is important to recognize that the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the FFD&C Act) 
prohibits interstate commerce of adulterated 
foods (21 U.S.C. 331).  Under the FFD&C 
Act, a food that is decomposed is considered 
adulterated (21 U.S.C 342).  Accordingly, a fish 
or fishery product that is decomposed in whole 
or in part is prohibited from entering interstate 
commerce even if the type of decomposition 
may not lead to scombrotoxin (histamine) 
formation.  You should distinguish between 
recommendations in this chapter for sensory 
screening, as a component of a HACCP control 
strategy for scombrotoxin formation, and your 
obligation to avoid otherwise violating the 
FFD&C Act with regard to the distribution of 
decomposed food. 
Chemical testing 
Chemical testing is an effective means of 
detecting the presence of histamine in fish flesh. 
However, the variability in histamine levels 
between fish and within an individual fish can be 
large, even in fish from the same harvest vessel. 
For this reason, a guidance level has been set of 
50 ppm histamine in the edible portion of fish. 
If 50 ppm is found in one section of a fish or lot, 
there is the possibility that other sections may 
exceed 500 ppm. 
Because histamine is generally not uniformly 
distributed in a fish or a lot, the validity of 
histamine testing is dependent upon the design 
of the sampling plan.  The amount of sampling 
required to accommodate such variability of 
distribution is necessarily quite large.  The 
method of collection of the fish sample is also 
critical.  In large scombrotoxin-forming fish, the 
lower, anterior (forward) portion of the fish loin 
(not the belly flap) is likely to provide the best 
information about the histamine content of the 
fish.  The number of samples (i.e., scombrotoxin­
forming fish) necessary to make a judgment 
about a lot depends on the anticipated variability, 
but should not be fewer than 18 samples per lot, 
unless the lot contains less than 18 fish, in which 
case a sample should be collected from each fish. 
Where samples are composited to reduce the 
number of analyses needed on a lot, it should 
be done in a manner that ensures meaningful 
results.  No more than three samples should be 
composited, in order to minimize masking of 
problematic fish.  Furthermore, the analytical 
method and instrument used should be capable 
of reliably detecting histamine at the lower levels 
that are necessary for composited samples (e.g., 
17 ppm histamine in a three-sample composite, 
rather than 50 ppm in an uncomposited sample ). 
Combining additional indicators of conditions 
that can lead to histamine formation, such as 
sensory examination and internal temperature 
measurement, with histamine testing can provide 
better assurance of product safety.  Observation 
for the presence of honeycombing (voids in 
the fish flesh) in cooked tuna loins intended 
for canning is a valuable means of screening 
for fish that have been exposed to the kinds of 
temperature abuse that can lead to histamine 
development.  Any scombrotoxin-forming fish 
that demonstrate the trait should be destroyed or 
diverted to a non-food use. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether scombrotoxin (histamine) 
formation is a significant hazard at a processing 
step: 
1.	  Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
histamine will be introduced at this processing step 
(do unsafe levels come in with the raw material)? 
Table 3-2 (Chapter 3) lists those species of 
fish that are generally known to be capable 
of producing elevated levels of histamine if 
temperature abused.  Such species of fish 
have this capability because they contain 
naturally high levels of histidine.  They also 
have this capability because they are marine 
fish that are likely to harbor the kinds of 
bacteria that produce histidine decarboxylase. 
It is, therefore, reasonable to assume that 
without proper onboard vessel controls, these 
species of fish will contain unsafe levels of 
histamine upon receipt by the primary (first) 
processor. 
However, if the worst case environmental 
conditions (i.e., air and water temperatures) 
during the harvest season in a particular 
region would not permit the formation of 
histamine during the time necessary to 
harvest and transport the fish to the primary 
processor, onboard controls may not be 
necessary.  For example, such conditions 
might exist if the fish are harvested when air 
and water temperatures do not exceed 40°F 
(4.4°C), as evidenced by supporting data. 
It is also reasonable to assume that without 
proper controls during refrigerated (not 
frozen) transportation between processors, 
scombrotoxin-forming species of fish will 
contain unsafe levels of histamine upon 
receipt by the secondary processor (including 
warehouses).  In addition, you may need 
to exercise control to prevent pathogen 
growth or toxin formation when receiving 
a refrigerated (not frozen) raw or cooked 
product from another processor (see Chapter 
12).  The in-transit controls for secondary 
processors recommended in Chapter 12 are 
similar to those recommended in this chapter. 
2.	  Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
histamine will form at this processing step? 
To answer this question, you should consider 
the potential for time and temperature abuse 
in the absence of controls.  You may already 
have controls in your process that minimize 
the potential for time and temperature abuse 
that could result in unsafe levels of histamine. 
This guidance will help you determine 
whether those or other controls should be 
included in your HACCP plan. 
Time and temperature abuse that occurs 
at successive processing and storage steps 
may be sufficient to result in unsafe levels 
of histamine, even when abuse at one 
step alone would not result in such levels. 
For this reason, you should consider the 
cumulative effect of time and temperature 
abuse during the entire process. Information 
is provided above to help you assess the 
significance of time and temperature abuse 
that may occur in your process. 
3.	  Can unsafe levels of histamine formation that are 
reasonably likely to occur be eliminated or reduced 
to an acceptable level at this processing step? 
Scombrotoxin (histamine) formation should 
also be considered a significant hazard at any 
processing or storage step where a preventive 
measure is or can be used to eliminate the 
hazard if it is reasonably likely to occur. 
Preventive measures for scombrotoxin 
(histamine) formation can include: 
•	 Examining harvest vessel records 
to ensure that incoming fish were 
properly handled onboard the 
harvest v
essel, including:
 
Rapidly chilling the fish immediately 
after death; 
° 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
121 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Controlling onboard refrigeration 
(other than frozen storage) 
temperatures;
 
° 
Performing proper onboard icing;  
° 
•	 Testing incoming fish for 
histamine levels; 
•	 Ensuring that incoming fish 
were handled properly during 
refrigerated transportation from the 
previous processor,
 including: 
Controlling refrigeration temperatures 
during transit;
 
° 
Performing proper icing during 
transit; 
° 
•	 Checking incoming fish to ensure 
that they are not at an elevated 
temperature at time of receipt; 
•	 Checking incoming fish to ensure 
that they are properly iced or 
refrigerated at time of receipt;
 
•	 Performing sensory examination on 
incoming fish to ensure that the
y do 
not show signs of decomposition; 
•	 Controlling refrigeration 
temperatures in your plant; 
•	 Performing proper icing in your plant; 
•	 Controlling the amount of time that the 
product is exposed to temperatures 
that would permit histamine 
for
mation during processing. 
These preventive measures are ordinarily employed 
at receiving, processing, and storage steps.  
•	 Intended use 
Because of the heat stable nature of histamine, 
the intended use of the product is not likely to 
affect the significance of this hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for scombrotoxin 
(histamine) formation: 
1.	  If scombrotoxin (histamine) formation is a 
significant hazard at the receiving step, you 
should identify receiving as a CCP for this 
hazard. 
a.	  
If you are the primary processor of the 
scombrotoxin-forming fish (i.e., if you 
receive the fish directly from the harvest 
vessel) and have a relationship with the 
operator of the harvest vessel(s) from 
which you purchase fish that enables 
you to obtain documentation of onboard 
practices, you should identify the 
following preventive measures for control 
of this hazard: 
•	 Examining harvest vessel records 
to ensure that incoming fish 
were properly handled onboard 
the harvest v
essel, including: 
Rapidly chilling the fish 
immediately after death; 
˚ 
Controlling onboard refrigeration 
(other than frozen storage) 
temperatures;
 
˚ 
Performing proper onboard icing; 
˚ 
•	 Checking incoming fish to ensure 
that they are not at an elevated 
temperature at time of receipt; and, 
•	 Performing sensory examination of 
incoming fish to ensure that the
y do 
not show signs of decomposition. 
Example: 
A mahi-mahi processor that regularly 
purchases from the same harvest 
vessels should require harvest vessel 
records as a condition of purchase.  
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
122 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The processor should also check 
th
e internal temperatures of 
incoming fish and perform sensory 
examination of these fish.  The 
processor should then set a CCP for 
histamine formation at receiving. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 1 - Harvest Vessel 
Control.” 
b.	  If you are the primary processor of the 
scombrotoxin-forming fish (i.e., if you 
receive the fish directly from the harvest 
vessel) and do not have a relationship 
with the operator of the harvest vessel(s) 
that enables you to obtain documentation 
of onboard practices, you should identify 
the following preventive measures for 
control of this hazard: 
•	 Testing incoming fish for 
histamine levels; 
•	 Checking incoming fish to ensure 
that they are not at an elevated 
temperature at time of receipt and, 
•	 Performing sensory examination of 
incoming fish to ensure that the
y do 
not show signs of decomposition. 
Example: 
A canned tuna processor that 
purchases from a variety of harvest 
vessels should subject incoming fish 
from each harvest vessel to histamine 
testing, internal temperature checks, 
and sensory examination.  The 
processor should then set a CCP for 
histamine formation at receiving. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 2 - Histamine Testing.” 
c.	  If you are a secondary processor of the 
scombrotoxin-forming fish (i.e., if you 
receive the fish from another processor), 
you should identify the following 
preventive measures for control of this 
hazard: 
•	 Ensuring that incoming fish were 
properly refrigerated during 
transportation from the previous 
processor,
 by controlling refrigeration 
temperatures during transit or, 
•	 Checking incoming fish to 
ensure that they are properly 
iced at time of receipt. 
Example: 
A tuna processor that receives fish 
from anoth
er processor should require 
evidence of temperature control 
throughout transit as a condition of 
receipt.  The processor should then 
set a CCP for histamine formation at 
receiving. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 3 - Transit Control.” 
This control strategy, in addition to 
“Control Strategy Example 1 - Harvest 
Vessel Control” or “Control Strategy 
Example 2 - Histamine Testing,” may 
also be applicable if you are a primary 
processor and transport the fish by truck 
from your harvest vessel unloading site to 
your processing facility. 
2.	  If scombrotoxin (histamine) formation is a 
significant hazard at one or more processing 
steps, you should identify the processing step(s) 
as a CCP for this hazard. 
a.	  
The preventive measure for this type of 
control is: 
•	 Controlling the amount of time 
that the scombrotoxin-forming 
product is exposed to temperatures 
that w
ould permit histamine 
formation during processing. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
123 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Example: 
A mahi-mahi processor should 
control histamine formation 
by limiting exposure time and 
temperature of the product during 
processing.  The processor should 
then set CCPs for histamine 
formation at the processing steps. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 4 - Processing Control.” 
This control strategy is intended for 
processing at ambient and air-conditioned 
temperatures.  “Control Strategy 
Example 5 - Storage Control” may be 
more appropriate for processing under 
refrigerated conditions. 
3.	  If scombrotoxin (histamine) formation is a 
significant hazard at a storage step for raw 
material, in-process product, or finished product, 
you should identify the storage step(s) as a CCP 
for this hazard. 
a.	  
The preventive measures for this type of 
control are: 
•	 Controlling refrigeration 
temperatures in your plant or, 
•	 Performing proper icing 
in your plant. 
Example: 
A mahi-mahi processor sh
ould control 
histamine formation by icing the 
product during raw material, in-process 
product, and finished product storage. 
The processor should then set CCPs for 
histamine formation at the storage steps. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 5 - Storage Control.” 
•	 Likely CCPs 
Following is further guidance on processing 
steps that are likely to be identified as CCPs 
for this hazard: 
•	 Receivi
ng; 
•	 Processi
ng, such as: 
Thawing; ° 
Brining and salting;° 
Smoking;° 
Heading and gutting;° 
Manual filleting and steaking;° 
Fermenting; ° 
Pickling;° 
Drying; ° 
Stuffing; ° 
Mixing (e.g., salad preparation); ° 
Portioning; ° 
•	 Packaging; 
•	 Final chilling after processing 
and packaging; 
•	 Storing raw material, in-process product, 
and finished product under refrigeration. 
Note: Rather than identify each processing step as an individual 
CCP when the controls are the same at those steps, it may be more 
convenient to combine into one CCP those processing steps that 
together contribute to a cumulative time and temperature exposure. 
•	 Unlikely CCPs 
Time and temperature controls will usually 
not be needed at processing steps that meet 
the following conditions: 
•	 Continuous, mechanical processing 
steps that are brief, such as: 
Mechanical filleting;
° 
•	 Processing steps that are brief and 
unlikely to contribute significantly 
to the cumulative time and 
temperature exposure, such as: 
Date code stamping;
° 
Case packing;° 
•	 Processing steps where the product 
is held in a frozen state, such as: 
Assembly of orders for distribution; 
° 
Frozen product storage; ° 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
124 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Retorting and post-retorting steps (if the 
product is covered by the Thermally 
Processed Lo
w-Acid Foods Packaged 
in Hermetically Sealed Containers 
regulation, 21 CFR 113 (called the 
Low-Acid Canned Foods Regulation 
in this guidance document)); 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides examples of five 
control strategies for scombrotoxin (histamine) 
formation.  It may be necessary to select more 
than one control strategy in order to fully control 
the hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation.  You may select a control strategy 
that is different from those which are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Harvest vessel control 
Histamine testing 
Transit control  
Processing control  
Storage Control  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - HARVEST 
VESSEL CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
The critical limits for this control strategy should 
include three components: 
•	 Harvest ve
ssel records; 
•	 Sensory e
xamination; 
•	 Internal te
mperature measurements. 
Harvest vessel records: 
•	 All scombrotoxin-forming fish lots received 
are accom
panied by harvest vessel records 
that show: 
Fish exposed to air or water temperatures 
above 83°F (28.3°C) were placed in ice,  
or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, or 
brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon 
as possible after harvest, but not longer 
than 6 hours from the time of death; 
˚ 
OR 
Fish exposed to air and water temperatures  
of 83°F (28.3°C) or less were placed in  
ice, or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, 
or brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon as  
possible after harvest, but not longer than 9  
hours from the time of death; 
˚ 
OR 
Fish that were gilled and gutted 
before chilling were placed in ice, or 
in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, or 
brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon 
as possible after harvest, but not longer 
than 12 hours from the time of death; 
˚ 
OR 
Fish that were harvested under 
conditions that expose dead fish to 
harvest waters of 65°F (18.3°C) or less 
for 24 hours or less were placed in ice,  
or in refrigerated seawater, ice slurry, or 
brine of 40°F (4.4°C) or less, as soon 
as possible after harvest, but not more 
than the time limits listed above, with the 
time period starting when the fish left the 
65°F (18.3°) or less environment; 
˚ 
OR 
Other critical limits for onboard handling 
(e.g., maximum refrigerated brine or 
seawater temperature, maximum fish 
size, maximum fish to brine/seawater/ 
ice ratio, maximum initial temperature of 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
125 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the fish) necessary to achieve a cooling 
rate that will prevent development of 
an unsafe level of histamine in the 
specific species, as established through a 
scientific study. 
Note: If the actual time of death is not known, an estimated time 
of the first fish death in the set may be used (e.g., the time the 
deployment of a longline begins). Table 7-1 provides a summary of 
the preceding recommended critical limits. 
AND
 
For fish held refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel: 
˚ 
•	 The fish were stored at or below 
40°F (4.4°C) after cooling; 
OR 
•	 The fish were stored completely 
and continuously surrounded 
by ice after cooling;  
AND 
Sensory examination: 
•	 Sensory examination of a representative 
sample of s
combrotoxin-forming fish shows 
decomposition (persistent and readily 
perceptible) in less than 2.5% of the fish in 
the sample.  For example, no more than 2 
fish in a sample of 118 fish may show signs 
of decomposition.  Note that the FFD&C 
Act prohibits interstate commerce of any 
decomposed fish whether or not the HACCP 
critical limit has been exceeded; 
AND 
Internal temperature measurements: 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard t
he vessel 24 or more hours after 
death: 
The internal temperature should be 40°F 
(4.4°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel from 15 to less than 24 
hours after death:  
The internal temperature should be 50°F 
˚ 
(10°C) or below; 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel from 12 to less than 15 
hours after death:  
The internal temperature should be 60°F 
(15.6°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel less than 12 hours after 
death:  
The internal temperature should 
be sufficiently below water and air 
temperatures to indicate that appropriate 
chilling methods were implemented 
onboard the harvest vessel.  Chilling 
of the fish should begin on the harvest 
vessel regardless of the time from death 
until off-loading from the vessel by the 
processor unless the environmental 
conditions (e.g., air and water 
temperatures) are below 40°F (4.4°C) 
from the time of death until off-loading 
from the vessel by the processor; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
Elapsed time from death and internal 
temperatures at the time of off-loading 
from the vessel by the processor should 
be consistent with cooling curves that 
will prevent development of an unsafe 
level of histamine in the specific species,  
as established through a scientific study.  
˚ 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
Harvest vessel records containing the following 
information: 
•	 Method of capture*; 
AND 
Where ap
plicable to the critical limit, the •	 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
date and time of landing the fish onboard 
the harvest vessel; 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, the 
estimated earliest date and time of death for 
fish brought onboard in the fishing set (e.g., 
trawl, gillnet, longline, or purse seine); 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, the 
air and water temperatures at the time of 
landing the fish onboard the harvest vessel*; 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, the 
water temperature at the depth where dead 
fish may remain until harvest; 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, the 
method of cooling* and temperature of the 
cooling medium; 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, the 
date and time cooling began and/or the date 
and time when the last fish in a fishing set 
(e.g., trawl, gillnet, longline, or purse seine) 
was placed in the cooling medium; 
AND 
•	 Where appl
icable to the critical limit, those 
factors of the cooling process that have been 
established through a scientific study as critical 
to achieving the cooling rate critical limits (e.g., 
refrigerated brine or seawater temperature, fish 
size, fish to brine/seawater/ice ratio, maximum 
initial temperature of the fish); 
AND 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
The storage temperature, as evidenced by: ˚ 
•	 The temperature of refrigerated 
seawater or brine in which 
the fish are stored; 
OR 
•	 The presence of ice that completely 
and continuously surrounds the fish. 
(*These items may be documented by the primary (first) processor, 
on the receiving records, rather than by the harvest vessel operator, 
on the harvest vessel records, provided the primary processor has 
direct knowledge about those aspects of the harvesting practices and 
has made first-hand observations for each lot received.  The vessel 
operator should document other onboard handling information.  The 
primary processor should maintain all relevant information.) 
AND 
Sensory examination: 
•	 Amount of decomposition in the lot; 
AND 
Internal temperature measurement: 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
The internal temperature of a 
representative number of the largest 
fish in the lot at the time of off-loading 
from the harvest vessel, concentrating on 
any fish that show signs of having been 
mishandled (e.g., inadequately iced);
 
˚ 
AND
 
Date and time of off-loading.
 ˚ 
Example: 
A primary processor receives 
bluefish from several day-boats 
that catch the fish when the air 
and water temperatures are below 
83°F (28.3°C). The day-boats take 
on ice at the processor’s facility 
immediately before setting out for the 
day and return within 9 hours to the 
processor’s facility with the iced catch. 
The processor monitors and records 
the date and time of departure of 
the vessels after they take on ice; the 
date and time of the return of the 
vessels; the ambient water and air 
temperatures of the fishing grounds; 
and the adequacy of icing of the 
catch at the time of off-loading.  The 
processor also conducts sensory 
evaluations and checks the internal 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
127 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
temperature of the catch upon arrival. 
Th
e harvest vessel operators perform 
no monitoring or record keeping. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For harvest vessel records:  
Review controls documented in the 
records; 
˚ 
AND
 
•	 For sens
ory examination: 
Examine at least 118 fish, collected  
representatively throughout each lot (or the  
entire lot, for lots smaller than 118 fish).   
Additional fish should be e
xamined if  
variability in fish-to-fish histamine content  
is expected to be high.  Lots should  
consist of only one species of fish; for  
vessels delivering multiple species, testing  
should generally be done separately on  
each species.  All fish within a lot should  
have a similar history of harvest.  If the  
fish are received frozen, this monitoring  
procedure may be performed by a  
sensory examination on the warmed flesh  
produced by drilling the frozen fish (drill  
method).  It may also be performed after  
thawing, rather than at receipt; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel: 
Use a temperature-indicating device 
(e.g., a thermometer) to measure the 
internal temperature of a representative 
number of the largest fish in each 
lot, concentrating on any that show 
signs of having been mishandled (e.g.,  
inadequately iced).  For example,  
when receiving 10 tons or more of fish,  
measure a minimum of one fish per ton,  
and when receiving less than 10 tons of 
fish, measure a minimum of one fish per 
1,000 pounds.  Measure a minimum of 
12 fish, unless there are fewer than 12 
fish in the lot, in which case measure all 
˚ 
of the fish.  Randomly select fish from 
throughout the lot.  Lots that show a high 
lev
el of temperature variability or lots 
of very small fish may require a larger 
sample size; 
AND 
Visually determine the date and time of 
off-loading. 
˚ 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every lot of scombrotoxin-forming fish 
receive
d. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For sensory examination: 
Any person who is qualified by 
experience or training to perform the 
e
xamination; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 For other c
hecks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls.  
˚ 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective actions to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 In the absence of harvest vessel records or 
when one o
f the harvester-related critical 
limits has not been met, or when the internal 
temperature critical limit at receiving has not 
been met: 
Chill and hold the affected lot (i.e.,  
fish of common origin) until histamine 
analysis is performed on a minimum 
of 60 fish representatively collected 
from throughout the lot, including any 
fish measured to have temperatures 
that exceeded the critical limit (or the 
entire lot for lots smaller than 60 fish).   
Reject the lot if any fish are found with 
histamine greater than or equal to 50 
ppm.   The fish collected for analysis 
may be composited for analysis if the 
action point is reduced accordingly.  For 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
example, a sample of 60 fish may be 
composited into 20 units of 3 fish each, 
provided the action point is reduced 
from 50 ppm to 17 ppm for each unit; 
OR
 
R
eject the lot;  
˚ 
AND 
•	 When the sensory examination critical limit 
has not been met: 
Chill and hold the affected lot (i.e.,  
fish of common origin) until histamine 
analysis is performed on a minimum 
of 60 fish representatively collected 
from throughout the lot, including all 
fish in the lot that show evidence of  
decomposition (persistent and readily 
perceptible odors) (or the entire lot for 
lots smaller than 60 fish), and reject the 
lot if any fish is found with histamine 
greater than or equal to 50 ppm; 
˚ 
AND 
If any fish in the lot are to proceed
into commerce for food use, perform 
a sensory examination of all fish in the 
lot to ensure that no decomposed fish 
proceed; 
˚ 
AND 
Any individual fish found to be 
decomposed (persistent and readily 
perceptible) should be destroyed or 
diverted to a non-food use; 
˚ 
OR
 
Reject the lot.
  ˚ 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that the identified 
harvesting and onboard practices and 
controls have been improved. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Harvest vessel records containing the 
inform
ation described above; 
AND 
•	 Receivi
ng records showing the date and time 
of off-loading; 
AND 
•	 Results of s
ensory examination; 
AND 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
Internal temperatures of the fish.
 ˚ 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Collect a representative sample of the raw 
materi
al, in-process product, or finished 
product, and analyze it for histamine at least 
quarterly; 
AND 
•	 Ensure tha
t new sensory examiners receive 
training to calibrate their ability to identify 
decomposed fish and that all sensory 
examiners receive periodic refresher training; 
AND 
•	 Where his
tamine testing is part of a 
corrective action plan, periodically verify 
the findings (e.g., by comparing results with 
those obtained using an Association of 
Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) method); 
AND 
•	 Before a te
mperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
˚ 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading  
on the device with the reading on a  
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
129 
 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a thermometer traceable to the National  
Institute of Standards and Technology  
(NIST) standards) under conditions that  
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
product internal temperature) within  
the temperature range at which it will  
be used; 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
OR 
Following the manufacturer’s instructions; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the  
beginning of operations.  Less frequent  
accuracy checks may be appropriate if  
they are recommended by the instrument  
manufacturer and the history of use of the  
instrument in your facility has shown that  
the instrument consistently remains accurate  
for a longer period of time.  In addition  
to checking that the device is accurate by  
one of the methods described above, this  
process should include a visual examination  
of the sensor and any attached wires for  
damage or kinks.  The device should be  
checked to ensure that it is operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
130 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
131 
TABLE 7-3 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - HARVEST VESSEL CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Harvest Vessel Control.”  This example illustrates how a fresh mahi-mahi processor that
receives the fish on ice directly from harvest vessels that use a hook and line technique (fish brought onboard alive) can control scombrotoxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative
purposes only.  It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.  
Histamine formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., metal fragments). 
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving 
fresh
mahi­
mahi on
ice from
harvest 
vessels 
Scombrotoxin 
formation 
All lots received are accompanied 
by harvest vessel records that show 
(1) placement of fish on ice
within 9 hours of death if the
maximum exposure temperature 
does not exceed 83°F or within 6 
hours if the maximum exposure 
temperature exceeds 83°F;
(2) The fish were stored 
completely and continuously
surrounded by ice after capture 
Harvest vessel 
records 
Review of 
controls
documented
in the records 
Every 
lot
received 
Receiving 
supervisor 
Reject 
the lot
Discontinue
use of the
supplier
until
evidence 
is obtained
that
harvesting  
and
onboard
practices 
and
controls
have been 
improved 
Harvester 
vessel 
records 
Perform histamine analysis on 
1 incoming lot every 3 months 
(18 fish per sample)
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation 
Less than 2.5% decomposition
(persistent and readily perceptible)
in the incoming lot 
Amount
of
decomposition
in the incoming
lot 
Sensory
examination
(118 fish per
lot; or all fish
in the lot if
less than 118
fish) 
Every 
lot
received 
Quality
control
staff 
Receiving 
record 
Provide sensory training 
for new fish examiners and 
annual training for all fish 
examiners
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation
Internal temperatures of all fish 
are to meet the following criteria 
based on the time since the death
of the fish:
>24 hours g ≤ 40° 
15 to < 24 hours g  ≤ 50° 
12 to < 15 hoursg ≤ 60° 
< 12 hours g below ambient 
air and water temperatures 
commensurate with size of fish and 
time since death 
Internal 
temperature 
of the fish at
time of
off-loading 
from vessel; 
Date and time
of off-loading 
Digital
thermometer 
(1 fish/1,000
pounds;
minimum of
12 fish per
lot) 
Every 
lot
received 
Receiving 
supervisor 
Receiving 
record 
Check the digital thermometer
for accuracy and damage and
to ensure that it is operational
before putting it into operation;
perform these same checks
daily, at the beginning of
operations; and calibrate it once
per year
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - HISTAMINE 
TESTING 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
The critical limits for this control strategy should 
include three components: 
•	 Histamin
e testing; 
•	 Sensory e
xamination; 
•	 Internal te
mperature measurements. 
Histamine testing: 
•	 Analysis of a representative sample of 
scombro
toxin-forming fish shows less than 
50 ppm histamine in all fish in the sample; 
AND 
Sensory examination: 
•	 Sensory examination of a representative 
sample of s
combrotoxin-forming fish shows 
decomposition (persistent and readily 
perceptible) in less than 2.5% of the fish in 
the sample.  For example, no more than 2 
fish in a sample of 118 fish may show signs 
of decomposition.  Note that the FFD&C 
Act prohibits interstate commerce of any 
decomposed fish whether or not the HACCP 
critical limit has been exceeded; 
AND 
Internal temperature measurements: 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard t
he vessel 24 or more hours after 
death: 
The internal temperature should be 40°F 
(4.4°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel from 15 to less than 24 
hours after death:  
The internal temperature should be 50°F 
(10°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel from 12 to less than 15 
hours after death:  
The internal temperature should be 60°F 
(15.6°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish held i
ced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel less than 12 hours after 
death:  
The internal temperature should 
be sufficiently below water and air 
temperatures to indicate that appropriate 
chilling methods were implemented 
onboard the harvest vessel.  Chilling 
of the fish should begin on the harvest 
vessel regardless of the time from death 
until off-loading from the vessel by the 
processor, unless the environmental 
conditions (e.g. air and water 
temperatures) are below 40°F (4.4°C) 
from the time of death until off-loading 
from the vessel by the processor; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
Elapsed time from death and internal 
temperatures at the time of off-loading 
from the vessel by the processor should 
be consistent with cooling curves that 
will prevent development of an unsafe 
level of histamine in the specific species,  
as established through a scientific study.  
˚ 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
Histamine testing: 
•	 Histamine content in the scombrotoxin­
forming
 fish flesh; 
AND 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
132 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Sensory examination: 
•	 Amount of decomposition in the 
scombroto
xin-forming fish lot; 
AND 
Internal temperature measurement: 
•	 For scombrotoxin-forming fish held iced or 
refrigerated (not frozen) onboard the vessel:  
The internal temperature of a 
representative number of the largest 
fish in the lot at the time of off-loading 
from the harvest vessel by the processor,
  
concentrating on any fish that show 
signs of having been mishandled (e.g.,
  
inadequately iced);
 
˚ 
AND
 
Date and time of off-loading.
 ˚ 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For histamine analysis:  
Test a minimum of 18 fish, collected 
representatively throughout each lot (or 
the entire lot when there are fewer than 
18 fish in the lot).  Additional fish should 
be e
xamined if variability in fish-to-fish 
histamine content is expected to be high.   
Lots should consist of only one species 
of fish; for vessels delivering multiple 
species, testing should generally be done 
separately on each species.  Reject the 
lot if any fish are found with histamine 
greater than or equal to 50 ppm.   The 
fish collected for analysis may be 
composited if the critical limit is reduced 
accordingly.  For example, a sample of 
18 fish may be composited into 6 units 
of 3 fish each, provided the critical limit 
is reduced from 50 ppm to 17 ppm for 
each unit; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 For senso
ry examination: 
Examine at least 118 fish, collected 
representatively throughout each lot 
(or the entire lot, for lots smaller than 
118 fish).  Additional fish should be 
e
xamined if variability in fish-to-fish 
histamine content is expected to be high.   
Lots should consist of only one species 
of fish; for vessels delivering multiple 
species, testing should generally be 
done separately on each species.  If the 
fish are received frozen, this monitoring 
procedure may be performed by a 
sensory examination on the warmed 
flesh produced by drilling the frozen fish 
(drill method).  It may also be performed 
after thawing, rather than at receipt; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel: 
Use a temperature-indicating device 
(e.g., a thermometer) to measure the 
internal temperature of a representative 
number of the largest fish in each 
lot, concentrating on any that show 
signs of having been mishandled (e.g.,  
inadequately iced).  For example,  
when receiving 10 tons or more of fish,  
measure a minimum of one fish per ton,  
and when receiving less than 10 tons of 
fish, measure a minimum of one fish per 
1,000 pounds.  Measure a minimum of 
12 fish, unless there are fewer than 12 
fish in the lot, in which case measure all 
of the fish.  Randomly select fish from 
throughout the lot.  Lots that show a high 
level of temperature variability or lots 
of very small fish may require a larger 
sample size; 
˚ 
AND 
Visually determine the date and time of 
off-loading. 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every lot of scombrotoxin-forming fish received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For sensory examination and histamine 
testing:
   
Any person who is qualified by 
experience or training to perform the 
work; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 For other ch
ecks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls.  
˚ 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective actions to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 When the histamine-level critical limit at the 
receivi
ng step has not been met, reject the lot; 
AND 
•	 When the internal temperature critical limit 
has not been met: 
If histamine did not exceed 50 ppm in 
the initial testing: 
˚ 
•	 Chill and hold the affected lot 
(i.e., fish of common origin) until 
histamine analysis is performed on a 
minimum of 60 fish representativ
ely 
collected from throughout the lot, 
including any fish measured to 
have temperatures that exceeded 
the critical limit (or the entire lot 
for lots smaller than 60 fish).  Reject 
the lot if any fish are found with 
histamine greater than or equal 
to 50 ppm. The fish collected for 
analysis may be composited for 
analysis if the action point is reduced 
accordingly.  For example, a sample 
of 60 fish may be composited into 
20 units of 3 fish each, provided 
the action point is reduced from 
50 ppm to 17 ppm for each unit; 
OR 
•	 Reject the lot;
 
AND 
•	 When the sensory examination critical limit 
has not been met: 
If histamine did not exceed 50 ppm in 
the initial testing: 
˚ 
•	 Chill and hold the affected lot 
(i.e., fish of common origin) until 
histamine analysis is performed on a 
minimum of 60 fish representativ
ely 
collected from throughout the lot, 
including all fish in the lot that 
show evidence of decomposition 
(persistent and readily perceptible 
odors) (or the entire lot for lots 
smaller than 60 fish).  Reject the 
lot if any fish are found with 
histamine greater than or equal 
to 50 ppm. The fish collected for 
analysis may be composited for 
analysis if the action point is reduced 
accordingly.  For example, a sample 
of 60 fish may be composited into 
20 units of 3 fish each, provided 
the action point is reduced from 
50 ppm to 17 ppm for each unit; 
AND 
If any fish in the lot are to proceed
into commerce for food use, perfor
m 
a sensory examination of all fish in the 
lot to ensure that no decomposed fish 
proceed; 
˚ 
AND 
Any individual fish found to be 
decomposed (persistent and readily 
perceptible) should be destroyed or 
diverted to a non-food use; 
˚ 
OR
 
Reject the lot.
 ˚ 
AND 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until evidence 
is obtai
ned that the identified harvesting and 
onboard practices have been improved. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Receiving records showing:  
Date and time of off-loading; ˚ 
AND 
Results of histamine analysis; •	 
AND 
Results of sensory examination; 
•	 
AND 
For fish held iced or refrigerated (not frozen) 
onboard the vessel:  
Internal temperatures of the fish.
 
•	 
˚ 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Periodically verify histamine findings (e.g., by 
compar
ing results with those obtained using 
an AOAC method or by analyzing proficiency 
samples); 
AND 
•	 Ensure tha
t new sensory examiners receive 
training to calibrate their ability to identify 
decomposed fish and that all sensory 
examiners receive periodic refresher training; 
AND 
•	 Before a te
mperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
˚ 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
˚ 
traceable thermometer) under conditions
 
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
product internal temperature) within the
 
temper
ature range at which it will be used;
 
OR 
Following the manufacturer’s instructions;
 ˚ 
AND 
•	 Once in ser
vice, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the history 
of use of the instrument in your facility has 
shown that the instrument consistently remains 
accurate for a longer period of time.  In 
addition to checking that the device is accurate 
by one of the methods described above, this 
process should include a visual examination of 
the sensor and any attached wires for damage 
or kinks.  The device should be checked to 
ensure that it is operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrat
e the temperature-indicating device 
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent 
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
135 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
136 
TABLE 7-4 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - HISTAMINE TESTING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Histamine Testing.”  This example illustrates how a canned tuna processor that
receives frozen tuna directly from the harvest vessel can control scombrotoxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  It may be necessary to select more than 
one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Histamine formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., Clostridium 
botulinum growth and toxin formation).  
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving  
frozen 
tuna from
harvest 
vessels 
Scombrotoxin 
formation 
Less than
50 ppm
histamine in
all fish in the
sample 
Fish fl esh for 
histamine
content 
Histamine testing
using the AOAC 
977.13 method
on a minimum
of 18 fish per
lot (36 fish from
vessels with 
high variability 
of histamine
detected 
between fish 
or when 1 of
the first 18 fish
exceeds 30 ppm 
histamine) 
Every lot 
received 
Quality
assurance 
staff 
Reject the lot;
Discontinue use of the supplier
until evidence is obtained 
that harvesting and onboard 
practices have been improved
If the initial histamine sample
was <50 ppm, perform
histamine analysis on a
min, of 60 fish, collected
representatively from the lot
and reject the lot if any fish
contains ≥50 ppm histamine;
and if all fish <50 ppm 
Reports of 
histamine
analysis 
Do a quarterly 
comparison of histamine
test results with AOAC 
method
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action, and 
verification records 
within 1 week of 
preparation 
Less than 3
decomposed
fish
(persistent
and readily
perceptible)
in a 118-fish
sample 
Amount of
decomposition
in the
incoming lot 
Sensory 
examination (118 
fish per lot, or all 
fish if lot is less
than 118 fish) 
Every lot 
received 
Quality
assurance 
staff 
Conduct sensory evaluation of 
all fish in the lot, removing and 
destroying all decomposed fish 
Discontinue use of the supplier
until evidence is obtained 
that harvesting and onboard 
practices have been improved 
Sensory 
examination 
record 
Provide sensory training 
for new fish examiners 
and annual training for 
all fish examiners
Review monitoring,
corrective action, and 
verification records 
within 1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - TRANSIT 
CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, 
depending upon the nature of your operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 For fish delivered refrigerated (not frozen):  
All lots received are accompanied by 
transportation records that show that the 
fish were held at or below an ambient 
or inter
nal temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) 
throughout transit.  Note that allowance 
for routine refrigeration defrost cycles may 
be necessary; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish del
ivered under ice:  
Fish are completely surrounded by ice at 
the time of delivery; 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For fish delivered under ice on an open-bed 
truck:  
Fish are stored completely surrounded by 
ice; 
˚ 
AND 
The internal temperature of the fish at the 
time of delivery is 40°F (4.4°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish delivered under chemical cooling 
media such as gel packs: 
There is an adequate quantity of
cooling media that remain frozen to 
have maintained product at an internal 
temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) or below 
throughout transit;  
˚ 
AND 
The internal temperature of the fish at the 
time of delivery is 40°F (4.4°C) or below; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish del
ivered refrigerated (not frozen) 
with a transit time (including all time outside 
a controlled temperature environment) of 4 
hours or less (optional control strategy): 
Time of transit does not exceed 4 hours; 
˚ 
AND 
 Internal temperature of the fish at the 
time of delivery does not exceed 40°F 
(4.4°C). 
˚
Note: Processors receiving fish with transit times of 4 hours or less may 
elect to use one of the controls described for longer transit times instead. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 For scombrotoxin-forming fish delivered 
refrigerated (not frozen): 
The internal temperature of the fish 
throughout transportation;  
˚ 
OR 
The ambient temperature within the truck 
or other carrier throughout transportation; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For scombrotoxin-forming fish delivered under 
ice:   
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
product at the time of delivery;
 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For scombrotoxin-forming fish delivered under 
ice on an open-bed truck: 
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
product at the time of delivery; 
˚ 
AND 
The internal temperature of the fish at 
time of delivery;
 
˚ 
OR
 
•	 For scombrotoxin-forming fish held under 
chemical cooling media such as gel packs: 
The quantity and frozen status of cooling 
media at the time of delivery; 
˚ 
AND 
The internal temperature of the fish at the 
time of delivery; 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
•	 For scombr
otoxin-forming fish delivered 
refrigerated (not frozen) with a transit time of 
4 hours or less: 
The date and time fish were removed 
from a controlled temperature 
environment before shipment and the 
date and time delivered; 
˚ 
AND 
The internal temperature of a representative  
number of fish at the time of delivery. 
˚ 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For fish delivered refrigerated (not frozen):  
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
for internal produc
t temperature or 
ambient air temperature monitoring 
during transit;  
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish deli
vered under ice:  
Make visual observations of the adequacy  
of ice in a representative number of  
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) from  
throughout the shipment, at deliver
y;  
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish delivered under ice on an open-bed 
truck:
  
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice surrounding the product 
in a representative number of containers 
(e.g., cartons and totes) from throughout 
the shipment, at delivery;
 
˚ 
AND
 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,
  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representativ
e 
number of fish from throughout the 
shipment, at delivery;  
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish delivered under chemical cooling 
media such as gel packs: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy and frozen state of the cooling 
media in a representative number of 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) from 
throughout the shipment;
 
˚ 
AND
 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,
  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representativ
e 
number of fish from throughout the 
shipment, at delivery; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For fish delivered refrigerated (not frozen) 
with a transit time of 4 hours or less: 
Review carrier records to determine the 
date and time fish were removed from 
a controlled temperature environment 
before shipment and the date and time 
delivered;
 
˚ 
AND
 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,
  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representativ
e 
number of fish randomly selected from 
throughout the shipment, at delivery.   
Measure a minimum of 12 fish, unless 
there are fewer than 12 fish in a lot, in 
which case measure all of the fish.  Lots 
that show a high level of temperature 
variability or lots of very small fish may 
require a larger sample size. 
˚ 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every scombrotoxin-forming fish lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:   
Monitoring is performed by the device itself.   
The visual check of the data generated  
by the device, to ensure that the critical  
limits have consistently been met, may  
be performed by any person who has an  
understanding of the nature of the controls; 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
•	 For other c
hecks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
˚ 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Chill and hold the affected lot until histamine 
analys
is is performed on a minimum of 
60 fish representatively collected from 
throughout the lot, including any with 
temperatures that exceeded a critical limit 
and any fish observed to have been exposed 
to inadequate cooling media (or the entire lot 
for lots smaller than 60 fish).  Reject the lot if 
any fish is found with histamine greater than 
or equal to 50 ppm.  
The fish collected for analysis may be 
composited if the action point is reduced 
accordingly.  For example, a sample of 60 fish 
may be composited into 20 units of 3 fish 
each, provided the action point is reduced 
from 50 ppm to 17 ppm for each unit; 
OR 
•	 Reject th
e lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier or carrier 
until ev
idence is obtained that the identified 
transportation-handling practices have been 
improved. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Receiving records showing: 
For continuous temperature monitoring: ˚ 
•	 Printouts, charts, or readings from 
temper
ature-recording devices (e.g., 
temperature recorder); 
OR
 
For ice checks:
 ˚ 
•	 The number of containers examined 
and the sufficiency of ice for each; 
AND 
•	 The number of containers in the lot; 
OR
 
For chemical cooling media checks:
 ˚ 
•	 The number of containers 
examined and the frozen status 
of the cooling media for each; 
AND 
•	 The number of containers in the lot; 
AND 
Results of internal product temperature 
monitoring, where applicable, including: 
˚ 
•	 The number of containers 
examined and the internal 
temperatures observed for each; 
AND 
•	 The number of containers in the lot; 
AND 
Date and time fish were initially 
removed from a controlled temperature 
environment and the date and time fish 
were delivered, when applicable.  
˚ 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermo
meter) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
˚ 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g.,
 a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions 
that are similar to how it will be used 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
139 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g., product internal temperature) 
within the temperature range at which it 
will be used; 
OR 
Following the manufacturer’s instructions;
 
˚ 
AND 
•	 Once in serv
ice, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it is 
operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate
 the temperature-indicating device 
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent 
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Check the ac
curacy of temperature-recording 
devices that are used for monitoring transit 
conditions upon receipt of each lot.  The 
accuracy of the device can be checked 
by comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g., air 
temperature) within the temperature range at 
which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 When visual c
hecks of ice are used, 
periodically measure internal temperatures 
of fish to ensure that the ice are sufficient 
to maintain product temperatures at 40°F 
(4.4°C) or less;  
AND 
•	 Review mon
itoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week 
of preparation  are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
140 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
141 
TABLE 7-5 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - TRANSIT CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3 - Transit Control.”  This example illustrates how a fresh mahi-mahi secondary processor that 
receives the product by air under chemical coolant (gel packs) can control scombrotoxin formation. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  It may be necessary to select more than 
one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Histamine formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., metal fragments). 
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Scombrotoxin 
formation 
Adequate 
quantity of
frozen gel 
packs to
maintain the
product at 
40°F or less
throughout
transit; and 
Quantity
and frozen 
condition of
gel packs 
Visual observation 
of a minimum of
25% of shipping
containers in the
lot but not fewer 
than 12 containers
(or all containers if
lot has less than 12
containers) 
Every lot 
received 
Receiving 
clerk 
Reject the lot
Discontinue use of the
supplier or carrier until 
evidence is obtained that 
transportation-handling 
practices have been 
improved 
Receiving 
record 
Check the
thermometer for 
accuracy and 
damage, and to 
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
perform these 
same checks daily
at the beginning
of operations, and 
calibrate it once per 
year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action,
and verification 
records within 1
week of preparation 
Internal 
temperatures 
of all fish at
delivery are 
40°F or below 
Internal core 
temperature 
and a
near-surface 
temperature  
of each fish 
Digital thermometer 
for internal 
temperature of 
one fish in 25% of
shipping containers
but not fewer than 
12 containers (or
all containers if lot
has less than 12
containers) 
Every lot 
received 
Receiving 
clerk 
Reject the lot
Discontinue use of the
supplier or carrier until 
evidence is obtained that 
transportation-handling 
practices have been 
improved 
Receiving 
record 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - PROCESSING 
CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 During processing (e.g., butchering, 
cleanin
g, brining, salting, smoking, drying, 
fermenting, pickling, mixing, fermenting, 
stuffing, packing, labeling, and staging) of 
scombrotoxin-forming fish that have not 
been previously frozen or heat processed 
sufficiently to destroy scombrotoxin-forming 
bacteria: 
The fish are not exposed to ambient 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for 
more than 4 hours, cumulatively, if any 
portion of that time is at temperatures 
above 70°F (21.1°C); 
˚ 
OR 
The fish are not exposed to ambient 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for 
more than 8 hours, cumulatively, as 
long as no portion of that time is at 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C). 
˚ 
Note: Only one of the two limits above should be selected. They 
should not be added for a total exposure of 12 hours. 
OR 
•	 During pr
ocessing (e.g., thawing, butchering, 
cleaning, brining, mixing, fermenting, 
stuffing, packing, labeling, and staging) 
of scombrotoxin-forming fish or fishery 
products that have been (1) previously 
frozen or (2) heat processed sufficiently to 
destroy scombrotoxin-forming bacteria and 
are processed in a manner where there is 
an opportunity for recontamination with 
scombrotoxin-forming bacteria (e.g., contact 
with fresh fish, employees, or introduction 
of raw ingredients), such as in a tuna salad 
made from canned tuna with added raw 
ingredients: 
The fish are not exposed to ambient 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for 
more than 12 hours, cumulatively, if any 
portion of that time is at temperatures 
above 70°F (21.1°C); 
˚ 
OR 
The fish are not exposed to ambient 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) for 
more than 24 hours, cumulatively, as 
long as no portion of that time is at 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C).  
˚ 
Note: Only one of the two limits above should be selected. They 
should not be added for a total exposure of 36 hours. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The length of time the scombrotoxin-forming 
fish are expo
sed to unrefrigerated conditions 
(i.e., above 40°F (4.4°C)); 
AND 
•	 The ambien
t temperatures during the 
exposure periods. 
Note: If the critical limit is based on an assumption that temperatures 
may exceed 70°F (21.1°C), then only the length of exposure may 
need to be monitored. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Make visual observations of the length of 
time of pr
oduct exposure to unrefrigerated 
conditions (i.e., above 40°F (4.4°C)); 
AND 
•	 Measure amb
ient air temperature, using: 
A continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
located in the processing area; 
˚ 
OR 
A temperature-indicating device (e.g., a 
thermometer) located in the processing 
area.   
˚ 
Note: Where multiple processing locations are combined in a 
cumulative exposure control strategy, temperature monitoring may be 
needed in each of the processing locations. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
142 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Example: 
A fresh tuna processor using raw 
material that was not previously 
frozen has identified a series of 
processing steps (i.e., from raw 
material cooler to finished product 
cooler) as CCPs for scombrotoxin 
formation.  The processor establishes 
a critical limit of no more than 4 
cumulative hours of exposure to 
unrefrigerated temperatures in 
excess of 40°F (4.4°C) during these 
processing steps.  The processor uses 
a marked product to monitor the 
progress of the product through the 
processing steps.  The time that the 
marked product is removed from 
refrigeration to the time the last of 
the marked product is placed in the 
finished product cooler is monitored 
visually and recorded.  It is not 
necessary for the processor to measure 
temperature because the critical limit 
is based on an assumption that the 
product temperature may exceed 70°F 
(21.1°C). 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For exposure time:  
At least every 2 hours; ˚ 
AND 
•	 For temper
ature measurements: 
For a continuous temperature-recording 
device:  
˚ 
•	 Continuous monitoring during 
processing operations is 
accomplished by the device itself, 
with a visual check of the device 
at least once per lot or batch, but 
no less often than once per da
y; 
OR
 
For a temperature-indicating device:  
˚ 
•	 At least every 2 hours. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For a continuous temperature-recording device: 
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits hav
e consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For other ch
ecks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
˚ 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Chill and hold the affected product until 
histami
ne analysis is performed on a 
minimum of 60 fish representatively collected 
from throughout the affected lot.  Destroy 
the lot or divert it to a non-food use if any 
fish is found with histamine greater than 
or equal to 50 ppm.  The fish collected for 
analysis may be composited if the action 
plan is reduced accordingly.  For example, 
a sample of 60 fish may be composited into 
20 units of 3 fish each, provided the action 
point is reduced from 50 ppm to 17 ppm for 
each unit; 
OR 
•	 Destroy th
e product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the p
roduct to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Add ice to the product; 
OR 
•	 Return the a
ffected product to the cooler; 
AND 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Modify th
e process as needed to reduce the 
time and temperature exposure. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Processing records showing the results 
of time an
d temperature exposure 
measurements. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermomete
r) or a temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected.  This check can be 
accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature;  
˚ 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point.  Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
˚ 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if  
the device will be used at or near room  
temperature; 
˚ 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
air temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
˚ 
AND 
•	 Once in ser
vice, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it is 
operational and has sufficient ink and paper, 
where applicable; 
AND 
•	 Calibrat
e the temperature-indicating device 
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer.  Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions 
of use of the device.  Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration 
or the need to replace the device (perhaps 
with a more durable device).  Calibration 
should be performed at a minimum of two 
temperatures that bracket the temperature 
range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
144 
 
  
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
145 
TABLE 7-6 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - PROCESSING CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4 - Processing Control.”  This example illustrates how a fresh bluefish processor
that butchers, cleans, packs, labels, and boxes the fish at ambient temperature can control scombrotoxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  It may be 
necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.  
Histamine formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., metal 
fragments). 
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Processing
(butchering,
cleaning,
packaging,
labeling, and 
boxing) 
Scombrotoxin 
formation 
The product 
is not out of
refrigeration 
for more 
than 4 hours
cumulatively 
Time of product 
exposure to 
unrefrigerated 
conditions
during
processing
operations 
Visual tracking 
of time for a 
marked batch 
of product to 
move from raw 
material cold
storage to final 
product cold 
storage 
Every batch of 
fish
removed from 
raw material 
cold storage for 
processing 
Quality control
supervisor 
Ice and hold
the
affected batch 
in raw material 
cooler
Perform 
histamine
analysis on a
minimum of
60 fish in the
affected batch
Destroy the 
entire batch
if any fish
exceeds 
50 ppm
histamine
Modify the
process, if 
necessary, to 
reduce delays 
Processing
record 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification  
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - STORAGE 
CONTROL  
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 For refrigerated (not frozen) storage or 
processin
g of raw material, in-process 
product, or finished product:  
The product is held at a cooler 
temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below.  Note that allowance for 
routine refrigeration defrost cycles 
may be necessary.  On the other 
hand, minor variations in cooler 
temperature measurements can be 
avoided by submerging the sensor 
for the temperature-recording device 
(e.g., temperature-recorder) in a liquid 
that mimics the characteristics of the 
product.  Also note that critical limits 
during refrigerated storage that specify 
a cumulative time and temperature 
of exposure to temperatures above 
40°F (4.4°C) are not ordinarily suitable 
because of the difficulty in tracking 
the specific products and the specific 
cumulative temperature exposures 
that those products experience.   The 
cumulative exposure for each product 
would then need to be determined prior 
to shipping.  If you chose this approach,  
the critical limit for cumulative exposure 
to temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) 
should include time during transit,  
refrigerated storage, and refrigerated and 
unrefrigerated processing;  
˚ 
OR 
•	 For raw material, in-process product, or 
finished product stored under ice:  
The product is completely and 
continuously surrounded by ice 
throughout the storage time.  
˚ 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 For refrigerated storage of scombrotoxin
forming fish:  
­
The temperature of the cooler;  
˚ 
OR 
•	 For storage u
nder ice of scombrotoxin­
forming fish:  
The adequacy of ice surrounding the ˚ 
product. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For refrigerated storage: 
Measure cooler temperature using a 
continuous temperature-recording device 
(e.g., a recording thermometer); 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For storage u
nder ice:  
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice in a representative 
number of containers (e.g., cartons and 
totes) from throughout the cooler. 
˚ 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording devices: 
Continuous monitoring during storage is 
accomplished by the device itself, with a 
visual check of the recorded data at least 
once per day; 
˚ 
OR 
•	 For storage u
nder ice:  
Monitoring with sufficient frequency to 
ensure control.  
˚ 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording devices: 
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits ha
ve consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
˚ 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
OR 
•	 For other ch
ecks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
˚ 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Chill and hold the product until it can 
be evalua
ted based on its total time and 
temperature exposure, including exposures 
during prior processing operations.  
OR 
•	 Chill and ho
ld the affected product until 
histamine analysis is performed on a 
minimum of 60 fish collected from throughout 
each affected lot.  Destroy the lot or divert 
it to a non-food use if any fish is found 
with histamine greater than or equal to 50 
ppm.  The fish collected for analysis may 
be composited if the action point is reduced 
accordingly.  For example, a sample of 60 fish 
may be composited into 20 units of 3 fish 
each, provided the action point is reduced 
from 50 ppm to 17 ppm for each unit; 
OR 
•	 Destroy th
e product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the p
roduct to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Prevent further deviation: 
Add ice to the product; ˚ 
OR 
Move some or all of the product in the 
malfunctioning cooler to another cooler; 
˚ 
AND 
•	 Address the r
oot cause: 
Make repairs or adjustments to the 
malfunctioning cooler; 
˚ 
OR 
Make adjustments to the ice application 
operations.   
˚ 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 For refrigerated storage: 
Printouts, charts, or readings from  
continuous temperature-recording
  
devices;
 
˚ 
AND
 
Record of visual checks of recorded data;
 ˚ 
OR 
•	 For storag
e under ice:  
The number of containers examined and 
the sufficiency of ice for each; 
˚ 
AND 
The approximate number of containers 
in the cooler.  
˚ 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a recordi
ng thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify that 
the factory calibration has not been affected. 
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
˚ 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
air temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
˚ 
AND 
•	 Once in serv
ice, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
147 
 
 
 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrat e the temperature-recording device 
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
•	 Optimal
 calibration frequency is dependent 
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 When visua
l checks of ice are used, 
periodically measure internal temperatures 
of fish to ensure that the ice is sufficient 
to maintain product temperatures at 40°F 
(4.4°C) or less; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
148 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
149 
TABLE 7-7 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - STORAGE CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 5 - Storage Control.”  This example illustrates how a fresh fish processor can
control scombrotoxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, 
depending upon the nature of your operation.
Histamine formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., metal 
fragments). 
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Raw material 
and finished
product cold 
storage (shared 
cooler) 
Scombrotoxin 
formation 
Maximum
cooler
temperature of 
40°F 
Cooler
temperature 
Time and 
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with a visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Production 
supervisor 
Ice and hold the
affected product 
inside the cooler
Check
sufficiency of ice 
on the product 
two times per 
day until cooler 
is functioning 
reliably
Perform 
histamine analysis
on a minimum
of 60 fish
representative 
of the affected 
product
Destroy all 
affected 
product if any fish 
exceeds 50 ppm 
histamine
Adjust and repair 
cooler as needed 
Data
logger
printout 
Check the
data logger for 
accuracy and 
damage and to
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
perform these 
checks daily, at 
the beginning
of operations; 
and calibrate it 
once per year 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers 
Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may 
see them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 
p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 
2011, FDA had verified the Web site address for 
the references it makes available as hyperlinks 
from the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA 
is not responsible for any subsequent changes 
to Non-FDA Web site references after March 29, 
2011. 
•	 Arnold, S
., and D. Brown. 1978. Histamine 
toxicity from fish products. Adv. Food Res. 
24:113-154. 
•	 Baranowski, J. D., H. A. Frank, P. A. Brust, 
M. Chongsiriwatana, and R. J. Premaratne. 
1990. Decomposition and histamine content 
in mahimahi (Coryphaena hippurus). J. Food 
Prot. 53(3):217−222. 
•	 Behling
, A. R., and S. L. Taylor. 1982. 
Bacterial histamine production as a function 
of temperature and time of incubation. J. 
Food Sci. 47:1311-1317. 
•	 Bjeldan
es, L. F., D. E. Schultz, and M. M. 
Morris. 1978. On the aetiology of scombroid 
poisoning: cadaverine potentiation of 
histamine toxicity in the guinea pig. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 16:157-159. 
•	 Brillant
es, S., S. Paknol, and A. Totakien. 
2002. Histamine formation in fish sauce 
production. J. Food Sci. 67:2090-2094. 
•	 Concon, J
. (ed.), 1988. Food toxicology, p. 
511-605. Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, NY. 
•	 Eitenmi
ller, R., and S. DeSouza. 1984. 
Enzymatic mechanisms for amine formation 
in fish, p. 431-442. In E. Ragelis (ed.), 
Seafood toxins. American Chemical Society, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 Farn, G., a
nd C. Sims. 1987. Chemical indices 
of decomposition in tuna, p. 175-184. In D. 
Kramer and J. Liston (ed.), Seafood quality 
determination (Book 15 of Developments in 
seafood science). Elsevier, New York, NY. 
•	 Fletche
r, G. C., G. Summers, and P. W. C. 
van Veghel. 1998. Levels of histamine and 
histamine-producing bacteria in smoked fish 
from New Zealand markets. J. Food Prot. 
61(8):1064-1070. 
•	 Frank, H. A., and D. H. Yoshinaga. 1984. 
Histamine formation in tuna, p. 443-451.  In  
E.  Ragelis (ed.), Seafood toxins. American 
Chemical Society, Washington, DC. 
•	 Frank, H. A
., D. H. Yoshinaga, and W. 
Nip. 1981. Histamine formation and 
honeycombing during decomposition of 
skipjack tuna. Katsuwonus pelamis, at 
elevated temperatures. Mar. Fisheries Rev. 
43(10):9-14. 
•	 Hernández-Herrero, M. M., A. X. Roig-Sagués, 
J. J. Rodríguez-Jerez, and M. T. Mora-Ventura. 
1999. Halotolerant and halophilic histamine-
forming bacteria isolated during the ripening 
of salted anchovies (Engraulis encrasicholus).  
J. Food Prot. 62(5):509-514. 
•	 Inestia
, C. 1973. Significance and detection 
of histamine in food, p. 327-347. In 
Microbiological safety of food. Academic 
Press, New York, NY. 
•	 Lehane, L
., and J. Olley. 2000. Review:  
histamine fish poisoning revisited. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 58:1-37. 
•	 Predy, G.
, L. Honish, W. Hohn, and S. Jones. 
2003. Was it something she ate? Case report 
and discussion of scombroid poisoning. Can. 
Med. Assoc. J. 168(5):587-588. 
•	 Silva, C. C
. G., J. B. Da Ponte, and M. L. N. 
Enes Dapkevicius. 1998. Storage temperature 
effect on histamine formation in big eye tuna 
and skipjack. J. Food Sci. 63(4):644-647. 
•	 Starusz
kiewicz, W. F. April 2007. Report 
on the 2005 Hawaii Bigeye Tuna Research 
Project. Effects of onboard fish handling on 
the formation of histamine. 
•	 Staruszkiewicz, W. F., J. D. Barnett, P. L. 
Rogers, R. A. Benner, Jr., L. L. Wong, and 
J. Cook. 2004. Effects of on-board and 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
150 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dockside handling on the formation of 
biogenic amines in mahimahi (Coryphaena 
hippurus), skipjack tuna (Katsuwonus 
pelamis), and yellowfin tuna (Thunnus 
albacares). J. Food Prot. 67(1):134-141. 
•	 Stratto
n, J., and S. Taylor. 1991. Scombroid 
poisoning, p. 331-351. In D. Ward and C. 
Hackney (ed.), Microbiology of marine food 
products. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 
NY. 
•	 Taylor, S. 1985. Histamine poisoning 
associated with fish, cheese, and other foods, 
p. 1-47. World Health Organization, VPH/ 
FOS/85.1. Geneva, Switzerland. 
•	 Taylor, S
. 1988. Marine toxins of microbial 
origin. Food Technol. 42:94-98. 
•	 Taylor, S., and S. Summer. 1987. Detection 
of histamine, cadaverine, and putrescine, 
p. 235-246.  In D. Kramer and J. Liston (ed.), 
Seafood quality determination (Book 15 of 
Developments in seafood science). Elsevier, 
New York, NY. 
•	 Taylor, S
. L., J. Y. Hui, and D. E. Lyons. 
1984. Toxicology of scombroid poisoning, p. 
417-430. In E. Ragelis (ed.), Seafood toxins. 
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC. 
•	 van Sprec
kens, K. 1987. Histamine 
production by psychrophilic flora, p. 
309-318. In D. Kramer and J. Liston (ed.), 
Seafood quality determination (Book 15 of 
Developments in seafood science). Elsevier, 
New York, NY. 
•	 Yongsaw
atdigul, J., Y. J. Choi, and S. 
Udomporn. 2004. Biogenic amines 
formation in fish sauce prepared from 
fresh and temperature-abused Indian 
anchovy (Stolephourus indicus). J. Food Sci. 
69(4):312-319. 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
151 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 7: Scombrotoxin (Histamine) Formation 
152
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8: Other Decomposition-Related Hazards 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
Chapter 7 covers scombrotoxin poisoning in 
certain species of fish.  This poisoning occurs as a 
result of the formation of high levels of histamine 
during decomposition of the fish at improper 
holding temperatures. 
There are indications that decomposition 
can result in the production of other toxins 
(e.g., biogenic amines, such as putrescine and 
cadaverine) that have the potential to cause illness, 
even in the absence of histamine formation.  Such 
illnesses have been reported with consumption of 
a number of fish species.  FDA also has received 
a number of consumer complaints concerning 
illnesses that are associated with the consumption 
of decomposed shrimp and salmon. 
There are also some indications that chemicals 
formed when fats and oils in foods oxidize may 
contribute to long-term detrimental health effects. 
CHAPTER 8: Other Decomposition-Related Hazards 
153 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers 
Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may 
see them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 
p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 
2011, FDA had verified the Web site address for 
the references it makes available as hyperlinks 
from the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA 
is not responsible for any subsequent changes 
to Non-FDA Web site references after March 29, 
2011. 
•	 Arnold, S
. H., and D. W. Brown. 1978. 
Histamine toxicity from fish products. Adv. 
Food Res. 24:113-154. 
•	 Bjeldan
es, L. F., D. E. Schultz, and M. M. 
Morris. 1978. On the aetiology of scombroid 
poisoning: cadaverine potentiation of 
histamine toxicity in the guinea pig. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 16:157-159. 
•	 Concon, J
. 1988. Food toxicology. Part A. 
Principles and concepts, p. 626-627. Marcel 
Dekker, Inc., New York, NY. 
•	 Eitenmiller, R., and S. DeSouza. 1984. 
Enzymatic mechanisms for amine formation 
in fish, p. 431-442.  In Ragelis, E. (ed.), 
Seafood toxins. American Chemical Society, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 Farn, G., a
nd C. Sims. 1987. Chemical indices 
of decomposition in tuna, p. 175-184. In D. 
Kramer and J. Liston (ed.), Seafood quality 
determination (Book 15 of Developments in 
food science). Elsevier, New York, NY. 
•	 Guillén
, M. D., and E. Goicoechea. 2008. 
Toxic oxygenated alpha, beta-unsaturated 
aldehydes and their study in foods: a review. 
Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 48:119-136. 
•	 Kubow, S. 1
992. Routes of formation and 
toxic consequences of lipid oxidation 
products in foods. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 
12:63-81. 
•	 Lehane, L
., and J. Olley. 2000. Review: 
histamine fish poisoning revisited. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 58:1-37. 
•	 Parrot, J
., and G. Nicot. 1986. Absorption 
de l’histamine par l’appareil digestif, p. 
148-161. In Handbuch der Experimentellen 
Pharmakologie, Vol. 18. Springer-Verlag, New 
York, NY. 
•	 Quakenb
ush, F. W. 1945. Toxicity of rancid 
fats. Oil & Soap. 22:336-338. 
•	 Stratto
n, J., and S. Taylor. 1991. Scombroid 
poisoning, p. 331-351. In D. Ward and C. 
Hackney (ed.), Microbiology of marine food 
products. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 
NY. 
•	 Taylor, S. 1985. Histamine poisoning 
associated with fish, cheese, and other foods, 
p. 1-47. World Health Organization, VPH/ 
FOS/85.1. Geneva, Switzerland. 
•	 Taylor, S
. 1988. Marine toxins of microbial 
origin. Food Technol. 42:94-98. 
•	 Taylor, S
., and S. Summer. 1987. 
Determination of histamine, putrescine, and 
cadaverine, p. 235-246. In D. Kramer and J. 
Liston (ed.), Seafood quality determination 
(Book 15 of Developments in food science). 
Elsevier, New York, NY. 
•	 Taylor, S
. L., J. Y. Hui, and D. E. Lyons. 
1984. Toxicology of scombroid poisoning, p. 
417-430. In E. Ragelis (ed.), Seafood toxins. 
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC. 
CHAPTER 8: Other Decomposition-Related Hazards 
154 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides in fish pose a potential human health 
hazard. Fish can be harvested from waters that 
are contaminated by varying amounts of industrial 
chemicals, including heavy metals and pesticides. 
These contaminants may accumulate in fish at 
levels that can cause human health problems 
(e.g., carcinogenic and mutagenic effects). The 
hazard is most commonly associated with 
exposure over a prolonged period of time (chronic 
exposure). Illnesses related to a single exposure 
(one meal) are very rare. Concern for these 
contaminants primarily focuses on fish harvested 
from aquaculture ponds, freshwater bodies, 
estuaries, and near-shore coastal waters (e.g., areas 
subject to shoreside contaminant discharges), 
rather than from the open ocean. Environmental 
chemicals and pesticides may also accumulate 
in aquacultured fish through contaminated feed 
ingredients (e.g., pesticides in oil-containing feed 
ingredients derived from near-shore bait fish). 
Although some pesticides have not been produced 
or used in the United States for many years (e.g., 
dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT) and 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)), many are very 
persistent and tend to accumulate in soil and 
sediments. Once pesticides are introduced into the 
environment, they may travel beyond their point 
of application or discharge. 
Certain pesticides are applied directly to the water in 
aquaculture ponds to control weeds and algae and 
to eliminate fish and invertebrates. These products 
can be used legally only if they are registered with 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) 
and used according to conditions described on the  
label (40 CFR 180 and the “Guide to Drug, Vaccine,  
and Pesticide Use in Aquaculture,” the Federal Joint  
Subcommittee on Aquaculture (http://aquanic.org/ 
jsa/wgqaap/drugguide/drugguide.htm)). 
Many contaminants accumulate in the edible fatty 
tissues of fish. Concentrations of these contaminants 
can vary considerably in individual fish of the same 
species from the same location, depending on factors 
such as their fat content, size, age, and gender. 
In the case of components or extracts of whole 
fish (e.g., dietary supplements, dietary ingredients, 
and flavors), the component or extract may contain 
higher or lower concentrations of environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides than 
the whole fish from which it was derived. For 
example, organochlorine contaminants, such as 
PCBs, are oil soluble. When producing fish oil 
and fish meal, any PCBs present will become 
more concentrated in the oil fraction and less 
concentrated in the water fraction, as compared 
with the levels in the whole fish. 
•	 Control of chemical contaminants 
Federal tolerances and action levels are 
established for some of the most toxic and 
persistent contaminants that can be found in 
fish. These levels are listed in Table 9-1. State, 
tribal, local, or foreign authorities may use the 
federal tolerances or action levels to decide 
whether to issue local advisories to consumers 
recommending limits on consumption of all or 
certain species of locally harvested fish (some of 
which may be commercially important) or to close 
waters for commercial harvesting of all or certain 
species of fish. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the case of molluscan shellfish, state, tribal, 
territorial and foreign government agencies, 
called shellfish control authorities, consider the 
degree of chemical contamination as part of their 
classification of harvesting waters. As a result of 
these classifications, molluscan shellfish harvesting 
is allowed from some waters and not from others. 
Shellfish control authorities then exercise control 
over the molluscan shellfish harvesters to ensure that 
harvesting takes place only when and where it has 
been permitted. In this context, molluscan shellfish 
include oysters, clams, mussels, and scallops. 
Other significant elements of shellfish control  
authorities’ efforts to control the harvesting of  
molluscan shellfish include requirements that  
(1) containers of in-shell molluscan shellfish  
(shellstock) bear a tag that identifies the type  
and quantity of shellfish, the harvester, harvest  
location, and the date of harvest (21 CFR  
123.28(c)); (2) molluscan shellfish harvesters be  
licensed (note that licensing may not be required  
in all jurisdictions); (3) processors that ship,  
reship, shuck, or repack molluscan shellfish be  
certified; and (4) containers of shucked molluscan  
shellfish bear a label with the processor’s name,  
address, and certification number. 
Processors of seafood components and extracts 
may choose to control environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides at receipt (e.g., by 
screening raw materials). If contaminants in 
the raw material are present at unacceptable 
levels, processors may reject the product or 
choose to implement refining steps that reduce 
the contaminants to acceptable levels in the 
finished product. These steps may include 
distillation, absorption, and steam deodorization. 
You should validate the effectiveness of these 
refining steps at reducing environmental and 
chemical contaminants to an acceptable level 
and include appropriate controls in your Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan. No 
further information on these control measures is 
provided in this guidance document. 
•	 Tolerance and action levels 
Table 9-1, “Environmental Chemical Contaminants 
and Pesticides Tolerance and Action Levels,” 
lists the tolerance and action levels that have 
been established for environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides in the edible portion 
of fish (wet weight). 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
156 
 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
157 
TABLE 9-1 
ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMICAL CONTAMINANTS AND PESTICIDES TOLERANCE AND ACTION LEVELS 
Tolerance Levels 
DELETERIOUS 
SUBSTANCE 
LEVEL IN 
EDIBLE TISSUE FOOD COMMODITY REFERENCE 
PCBs 2 ppm All fish 21 CFR 109.30 
Carbaryl 0.25 ppm Oysters 40 CFR 180.169 
Diquat 2 ppm Fish 40 CFR 180.226 
Diquat 20 ppm Shellfish 40 CFR 180.226 
Diuron and its 
metabolites 
2 ppm Farm-raised, 
freshwater finfish 
40 CFR 180.106 
Endothall and 
its monomethyl ester 
0.1 ppm All fish 40 CFR 180.293 
Fluridone 0.5 ppm Finfish and 
crayfish 
40 CFR 180.420 
Glyphosate 0.25 ppm Fish 40 CFR 180.364 
Glyphosate 3 ppm Shellfish 40 CFR 180.364 
2,4-D 0.1 ppm Fish 40 CFR 180.142 
2,4-D 1 ppm Shellfish 40 CFR 180.142 
Action Levels 
DELETERIOUS 
SUBSTANCE 
LEVEL IN 
EDIBLE TISSUE FOOD COMMODITY REFERENCE 
Aldrin and 
dieldrin1 
0.3 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Benzene 
hexachloride 
0.3 ppm Frog legs “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Chlordane 0.3 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Chlordecone2 0.3 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Chlordecone2 0.4 ppm Crabmeat “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
DDT, TDE, 
and DDE3 
5 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Methylmercury4 1 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 540.600 
Heptachlor and 
Heptachlorepoxide5 
0.3 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
Mirex 0.1 ppm All fish “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 575.100 
1. The action level for aldrin and dieldrin is for residues of the pesticides individually or in combination. However, in calculating a total, amounts 
of aldrin or dieldrin found at below 0.1 ppm are not counted. 
2. Previously listed as Kepone, the trade name of chlordecone. 
3. The action level for DDT, TDE, and DDE is for residues of the pesticides individually or in combination. However, in calculating a total, amounts 
of DDT, TDE, and DDE found below 0.2 ppm are not counted. 
4. See Chapter 10 for additional information. 
5. The action level for heptachlor and heptachlor epoxide is for the pesticides individually or in combination. However, in calculating a total, 
amounts of heptachlor and heptachlor epoxide found below 0.1 ppm are not counted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides are a significant 
hazard at a processing step: 
1.	  Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
environmental chemical contaminants or 
pesticides will be introduced at this processing 
step (e.g., do such contaminants and pesticides 
come in on the raw material)? 
Tables 3-2 and 3-3 (Chapter 3) identify the 
species of fish for which environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides 
are a potential hazard. Under ordinary 
circumstances, it would be reasonably likely 
to expect that, without proper controls, 
unsafe levels of environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides could enter 
the process at the receiving step from 
those species. However, there may be 
circumstances that would allow you to 
conclude that it is not reasonably likely for 
unsafe levels of environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides to occur in 
fish harvested from your area. You should 
be guided by the historical occurrence of 
environmental contaminants and pesticides, 
at levels above established tolerance and 
action levels, in fish from the area in which 
your fish are caught. This information may be 
available from federal, state, tribal, territorial, 
local, or foreign health or environmental 
authorities in the area where your fish are 
caught. 
If you are receiving fish, other than molluscan 
shellfish, from another processor, you would 
not need to identify environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides as a significant 
hazard. This hazard should have been fully 
controlled by the primary (first) processor. 
2.	  Can unsafe levels of environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides that were introduced 
earlier be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable 
level at this processing step? 
Environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides should be considered a significant 
hazard at any processing step where a 
preventive measure is or can be used 
to eliminate the hazard or to reduce the 
likelihood of its occurrence to an acceptable 
level. Preventive measures for environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides can 
include: 
For wild-caught fish other than molluscan 
shellfish: 
•	 Making sure that incoming fish have 
not been harvested from waters that are 
closed to commercial harv
est because of 
concentrations of environmental chemical 
contaminants or pesticides exceeding 
the federal tolerance or action levels; 
•	 Making sure that incoming fish have 
not been harvested (for commercial 
purposes) from the same waters that 
are under a consumption advisor
y 
by a state, tribal, territorial, local, or 
foreign regulatory authority based 
on a determination by the authority 
that fish harvested from these waters 
are reasonably likely to contain 
contaminants above the federal 
tolerance or action levels. Note that 
many consumption advisories are not 
based on such a determination. 
For aquacultured fish other than molluscan 
shellfish: 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, the 
producer’s lot-b
y-lot certification that 
harvest is from uncontaminated waters, 
coupled with appropriate verification; 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, test results 
of fish tissue samples or production 
site w
ater for those contaminants that 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
are reasonably likely to be present, and 
obtaining information on present land 
use practices in the area immediately 
surrounding the production area (tests 
and monitoring may be performed by 
the aquacultural producer, a state, tribal, 
territorial, local, or foreign authority, 
or a third-party organization); 
•	 Conducting on-farm visits to the 
aquacultural producer to collect and 
analyze water or fish samples for those 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely 
to be present, and to re
view present land 
use practices in the area immediately 
surrounding the production area; 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, evidence 
(e.g., a third-party cer
tificate) that 
the producer operates under a third­
party-audited Quality Assurance (QA) 
program for environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides (e.g., the 
National Aquaculture Association’s Fish 
Producers Quality Assurance Program); 
•	 Conducting, at time of receipt, 
environmental chemical contaminant 
and pesticide testing of fish tissue 
for those contaminants that are 
reasonably likely to be present. 
For mol
luscan shellfish, both aquacultured 
and wild caught: 
•	 Checking incoming molluscan 
shellfish to ensure that containers 
are properly tagged or labeled; 
•	 Screening incoming molluscan shellfish 
to ensure that they are supplied by a 
licensed harvester (where licensing is 
required by law) or by a certifi
ed dealer. 
These preventive measures are ordinarily 
employed either at the receiving step or 
at the pre-harvest step. In the case of an 
integrated operation, where fish cultivation 
and processing are performed by the same 
firm, it may be possible and desirable to 
exercise preventive measures early in the 
process (ideally when the cultivation site is 
selected), rather than at receipt of the fish 
at the processing plant. Such preventive 
measures will not be covered in this 
guidance document. 
•	 Intended use 
For environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides, it is unlikely that the intended use of the 
product will affect the significance of the hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for the hazard of 
environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides: 
Is the raw material an aquacultured product other than 
molluscan shellfish? 
1.	  If the raw material is an aquacultured product 
other than molluscan shellfish, do you have a 
relationship with the producer that enables you to 
visit the farm before receipt of the fish? 
a.	  
If you have such a relationship with 
the producer, then you should identify 
the pre-harvest step as the CCP for 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides. The preventive measure 
for this type of control is: 
•	 Conducting on-farm visits to the 
aquacultural producer to collect 
and analyze water or fish samples 
for those environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides that 
are reasonably likely to be present, 
and to revie
w present land use 
practices in the area immediately 
surrounding the production area. 
Example: 
An aquacultured catfish processor 
that regularly purchases from the same 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
producers should visit the producers 
bef
ore the fish are harvested. The 
processor should collect and analyze 
water or fish samples for those 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely 
to be present and should review present 
land use at the pond site and in the 
adjacent areas. The processor should 
then set the CCP for environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides 
at the pre-harvest step. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter as 
“Control Strategy Example 1 - On-
Farm Visits.” 
b.	  If no such relationship exists with the 
producer, then you should identify 
the receiving step as the CCP for 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides. At the receiving step, you 
should exercise one of the following 
preventive measures: 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, 
the supplier’s lot-by-lot 
cer
tification of harvesting from 
uncontaminated waters, coupled 
with appropriate verification. 
Example: 
An aquacultured shrimp processor 
that purchases raw material through 
various brokers should receive lot­
by-lot certificates from the suppliers. 
The certificates would state that 
shrimp were not harvested from 
contaminated waters that would 
cause the levels in shrimp to exceed 
the established tolerance or action 
levels. The processor should combine 
this monitoring procedure with 
quarterly raw material testing 
for those environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides that are 
reasonably likely to be present for 
verification and should set the CCP  
at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 2 - 
Supplier’s Certification.” 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, 
test results of water or fish tissue 
samples for those contaminants that 
are reasonably lik
ely to be present 
and obtaining information on the 
present land use practices in the 
area immediately surrounding the 
production area (the aquaculture 
producer, a state, tribal, territorial, 
local or foreign authority, or a 
third-party organization may 
perform tests and monitoring). 
Example: 
A farm-raised catfish processor 
purchases catfish from producers 
with which the processor has no 
long-term relationship. The processor 
requires all new suppliers to provide 
the test results of water samples or 
fish tissue for those contaminants 
that are reasonably likely to be 
present and reports on present 
agricultural and industrial land use 
at and near the pond site. The land 
use reports are updated annually 
and whenever information on the 
land use change warrants a more 
frequent update (the aquaculture 
producer, a state, tribal, territorial, 
local or foreign authority, or a third-
party organization may perform 
tests and monitoring). The processor 
should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 3 - 
Records of Testing and Monitoring.” 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Conducting, at time of receipt, 
analysis of fish tissue for 
those environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides that are 
reasonably likely to be present. 
Example: 
An aquacultured shrimp pr
ocessor 
that purchases raw material 
through various brokers should 
screen all incoming lots of shrimp 
for those environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides that 
are reasonably likely to be used in 
the production area. The processor 
should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 4 - 
Chemical Contaminant Testing.” 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, 
evidence (e.g., a continuing or 
lot-b
y-lot third- party certificate) 
that the producer operates under 
a third-party-audited QA program 
that covers environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides. 
The certificate should outline the 
audit steps and summarize the 
water and/or fish test results. 
Example: 
An aquacultured trout processor that 
regularly purchases raw trout from the 
same producer should obtain a third-
party certificate, valid for 1 year (i.e., 
a continuing certificate), that attests 
that the producer operates under a QA 
program that controls environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides 
or should receive a lot-by-lot certificate 
issued by the third party. The processor 
should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 5 - QA 
Program.” 
Is the raw material molluscan shellfish (aquacultured or 
wild caught) or wild caught fish other than molluscan 
shellfish? 
1.	  If the raw material is molluscan shellfish or wild-
caught fish other than molluscan shellfish, you 
should identify the receiving step as the CCP 
for environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides. At the receiving step, you should 
exercise the following preventive measures: 
a.	  
For wild-caught fish other than 
molluscan shellfish:
 
•	 Making sure that incoming fish have 
not been harvested from waters 
that are closed to commercial 
harv
est because of concentrations of 
environmental chemical contaminants 
or pesticides exceeding the federal 
tolerance or action levels; 
•	 Making sure that incoming fish have 
not been harvested from waters that 
are under a consumption advisory 
b
y a state, tribal, territorial, local, 
or foreign regulatory authority 
based on a determination by the 
authority that fish harvested from 
the waters are reasonably likely to 
contain contaminants above the 
federal tolerance or action levels. 
Example: 
A processor purchases bluefish directly 
from the harvester. The processor 
asks the harvester where the fish were 
caught. The processor then compares 
the harvest area location with the areas 
that are closed to commercial fishing by 
state or local regulatory authorities or 
that are under consumption advisories 
that include bluefish and that are 
based on the reasonable likelihood that 
a contaminant level in fish tissue will 
exceed a federal tolerance or action 
level. The processor should set the CCP 
at receiving. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter as 
“Control Strategy Example 6 - Source 
Control for wild caught Fish Other 
Than Molluscan Shellfish.” 
b.	  For molluscan shellfish: 
•	 Checking incoming molluscan 
shellfish to ensure that they are 
properly tagged or labeled; 
•	 Checking incoming molluscan 
shellfish to ensure that they are 
supplied by a licensed harvester 
(where licensing is required by 
law) or b
y a certified dealer. 
Example: 
A processor purchases oysters directly 
from the harvesters. The processor 
should check the harvest location 
on the tags attached to the sacks of 
oysters. The processor should then 
compare the harvest area location 
with information on closed waters 
and check the harvesters’ state 
licenses. The processor should set the 
CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter as 
“Control Strategy Example 7 - Source 
Control for Molluscan Shellfish.” 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides seven 
control strategies for environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides. It is important to 
note that you may select a control strategy that 
is different from those which are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
On-farm visit 
Supplier’s certification 
Records of testing and 
monitoring 
Chemical contaminant 
testing 
QA program 
Source control for wild 
caught fish other than 
molluscan shellfish 

Source control for 
molluscan shellfish  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - ON-FARM 
VISIT 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 Environmental chemical contaminants 
and pest
icides that are reasonably likely 
to be present in farm water may not be 
at levels so high that they are reasonably 
likely to result in concentrations in fish 
tissue above the established tolerance or 
action levels (refer to Table 9-1). Elevated 
concentrations of chemical contaminants 
in water can be an indication that they are 
reasonably likely to be present in the fish 
tissue. Note that US EPA has developed water 
quality guidance documents that may be 
suitable for evaluating water quality in local 
situations (U.S. EPA Water Quality Standards 
Handbook, Appendix I); 
OR 
•	 The level
s of environmental contaminants 
and pesticides in fish tissue samples that 
are reasonably likely to be present may not 
exceed the established tolerance or action 
levels (refer to Table 9-1); 
AND 
•	 Agricul
tural and industrial practices in the 
area near the production site must not be 
reasonably likely to cause contamination 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the fish tissue above the established 
tolerance or action levels (refer to Table 9-1). 
» Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The levels of environmental chemical 
contam
inant and pesticide residues found in 
water or in fish tissue for those contaminants 
that are reasonably likely to occur; 
AND 
•	 Agricul
tural and industrial practices in the 
area near the production site. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Collect and analyze water samples or fish 
tissue sam
ples from each production site; 
AND 
•	 Ask quest
ions about and observe agricultural 
and industrial practices in the area near the 
production site, such as: 
Which types of crops, if any, are grown 
in the area near the production site? 
° 
What pesticides, if any, are used on these 
crops, how are they applied, and at what 
time of year? 
° 
What industrial and urban discharges, if 
any, enter the watershed surrounding the 
production site? 
° 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For testing water: 
Before first delivery from each 
production site;
 
° 
OR
 
•	 For testi
ng fish tissue: 
Before each delivery; ° 
AND 
•	 For evaluating agricultural and industrial 
practices:
  
At least once per year for each 
production site. 
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Do not have the product shipped from the 
product
ion site for processing. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that the cause of the 
chemical contamination has been eliminated. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Test results; 
AND 
•	 On-site a
udit report. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
163 
 
   
   
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
164 
TABLE 9-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - ON-FARM VISITS
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - On-Farm Visits.” This example illustrates how an aquacultured catfish processor can 
control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Pre-harvest Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
Levels of 
environmental
chemical
contaminants and
pesticides in fish
tissue may not 
exceed established 
tolerance and action 
levels for those 
contaminants that
are reasonably likely 
to be present* 
Environmental
chemical
contaminant
and pesticide
levels in fish 
tissue for those 
contaminants
that are
reasonably
likely to be 
present* 
Collect samples 
and analyze for 
environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides* 
Before each 
harvest 
Field agent will
submit samples
to the contract 
laboratory 
Do not have the 
product shipped 
for processing 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the cause of
the chemical
contamination has
been eliminated 
Test 
results 
Review 
monitoring
and correction 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
Agricultural and 
industrial practices 
in the area near the
pond must not be
reasonably likely to 
cause contamination
of the fish
tissue above 
the established
tolerances and 
action levels 
Agricultural 
and industrial
practices near 
the pond 
Ask questions
and observe 
agricultural 
and industrial
practices 
Once per year Field agent Do not have the 
product shipped 
for processing 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the cause of
the chemical
contamination has
been eliminated 
Field
agent
report 
Review 
monitoring
and correction 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only. An actual plan should specify (1) in the Critical Limits column: the environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides that are reasonably likely to 
be present and the critical limits to be applied to each contaminant; and (2) in the Monitoring columns: the contaminants for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample collection, 
and the analytical method to be used for each contaminant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SUPPLIER’S 
CERTIFICATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 A certificate accompanying all lots received 
(lot by lot
) that indicates that fish were not 
harvested from contaminated waters that 
could cause the levels in fish tissue to exceed 
the established federal tolerance and action 
levels (refer to Table 9-1). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Presence of a certificate indicating harvesting 
from unco
ntaminated waters. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check for the presence of a certificate. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of t
he controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 Hold the lot u
ntil a certificate can be 
provided; 
OR 
•	 Hold and ana
lyze the lot for those environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides that are 
reasonably likely to be present. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that the supplier will 
comply with the certification controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Copy of the certificate; 
AND 
•	 Receivin
g record showing lots received and 
the presence or absence of a certificate. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Visit all new aquacultured fish producers 
within th
e year and all existing fish suppliers 
at a predetermined frequency (e.g., 25% per 
year) to collect and analyze water or fish 
tissue samples, as appropriate, for those 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely 
to be present, and review agricultural and 
industrial practices in the production area; 
OR 
•	 Collect a re
presentative sample of the raw 
material, in-process product, or finished 
product at least quarterly, and analyze it for 
those environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely to 
be present; 
AND 
•	 Review mon
itoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
165 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
166 
TABLE 9-3
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SUPPLIER’S CERTIFICATION
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Supplier’s Certification.” This example illustrates how an aquacultured shrimp 
processor can control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
Certificate 
accompanying
all lots received 
indicates that
fish were not 
harvested from 
contaminated
waters that 
could cause the
levels in fish 
tissue to exceed 
the established
federal 
tolerance and 
action levels 
Presence
of a
certificate 
Visual
check 
Each lot
received 
Receiving dock 
employee 
Reject lot
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier
will comply
with the
certification 
controls 
Copy of the 
certificate
Receiving 
record 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Visit all new 
aquacultured
fish producers
within the year 
and 25% of
existing 
suppliers each
year to collect 
and analyze
water samples,
and review 
agricultural 
and industrial
practices in 
the area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - RECORDS OF 
TESTING AND MONITORING 
pesticides that are reasonably likely to be 
present; 
Set Critical Limits. AND 
•	 Reports of an
alyses of the water from all 
new suppliers that show that levels of those 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely 
to be present are not so high that they are 
reasonably likely to result in levels in the 
fish tissue that exceed the established federal 
tolerance and action levels (refer to Table 9-1). 
(The aquaculture producer, a state, tribal, 
territorial, local, or foreign authority, or a 
third-party organization may perform tests.) 
Note that US EPA has developed water quality 
documents that may be suitable for evaluating 
water quality in local situations (U.S. EPA Water 
Quality Standards Handbook, Appendix I); 
OR 
•	 Reports of an
alyses of fish tissue for each 
delivery that show that levels of those 
environmental chemical contaminants 
and pesticides that are reasonably likely 
to be present are below the established 
federal tolerance and action levels (the 
aquaculture grower, a state, tribal, territorial, 
local, or foreign authority, or a third-party 
organization may perform tests); 
AND 
•	 Reports fro
m all suppliers that show that 
agricultural and industrial practices in the 
area near the aquaculture production site are 
not reasonably likely to cause contamination 
of fish tissue above the established federal 
tolerance or action levels (the aquaculture 
producer, a state, tribal, territorial, local, 
or foreign authority, or a third-party 
organization may perform monitoring). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Test results of water or fish tissue for those 
environ
mental chemical contaminants and 
•	 Monitori
ng results for agricultural and 
industrial practices. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check of test results and monitoring 
reports. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For results of water testing: 
All new suppliers; ° 
OR 
•	 For results o
f fish tissue testing: 
Each delivery; ° 
AND 
•	 For reports of evaluation of agricultural and 
industrial practices: 
At least once every year.
 
° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of t
he controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that the supplier will 
comply with the testing and evaluation 
controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Test results; 
AND 
•	 Reports of ev
aluation of agricultural and 
industrial practices. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
167 
   
   
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
168 
TABLE 9-4
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - RECORDS OF TESTING AND MONITORING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3 - Records of Testing and Monitoring.” This example illustrates how a farm-raised catfish 
processor can control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
Reports of analyses of 
the water from all new 
suppliers that show that 
levels of environmental 
chemical contaminants
and pesticides that are
reasonably likely to be 
present are not so high
that they are likely to 
result in levels in fish 
tissue that exceed the 
established federal 
tolerance or action levels* 
Reports of 
analyses
showing levels 
of environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides in
water samples 
for those 
contaminants that
are reasonably
likely to be 
present* 
Visual
check 
At first
delivery 
Quality
control staff 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier will
comply with the
testing and
evaluation 
controls. 
Test 
results 
Review 
monitoring
and
corrective 
action 
records
within 1
week of 
preparation 
Reports from all suppliers 
that show that agricultural 
and industrial practices 
in the area near the
production site are not 
reasonably likely to 
cause contamination
of fish tissue above the 
established tolerance or 
action levels 
Reports of 
agricultural 
and industrial
practices in the 
area near the
production site 
Visual
check 
Once per year Quality
control staff 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier will
comply with the
testing and
evaluation 
controls 
Reports of 
agricultural 
and
industrial
practices 
Review 
monitoring
and
corrective 
action 
records
within
1 week of 
preparation 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only. An actual plan should specify (1) in the Critical Limits column: the environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides that are reasonably likely to 
be present and the critical limits to be applied to each contaminant; and (2) in the Monitoring columns: the contaminants for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample collection, 
and the analytical method to be used for each contaminant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - CHEMICAL 
CONTAMINANT TESTING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 No lot may exceed the federal tolerance 
or actio
n levels for those environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides that 
are reasonably likely to be present (refer to 
Table 9-1). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Fish tissue for those environmental chemical 
contam
inants and pesticides that are 
reasonably likely to be present. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Obtain samples and analyze for 
enviro
nmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who is qualified by training or 
experie
nce to perform the analyses. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to product involved 
in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
Discontinue use of the supplier until
evidence is obtained that the cause of 
° 
the chemical contamination has been 
eliminated. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Test results. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Periodically verify the adequacy of the 
testin
g methods and equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained 
using an Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists, or equivalent method, or by 
analyzing proficiency samples); 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action and 
verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
169 
 
   
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
170 
TABLE 9-5
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - CHEMICAL CONTAMINANT TESTING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4 - Chemical Contaminant Testing.” This example illustrates how an aquacultured shrimp 
processor can control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL CON­
TROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
No lot of
shrimp may 
exceed the 
established
tolerance or 
action 
levels for 
environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides
that are
reasonably
likely to be 
present* 
Chemical
residue levels 
in shrimp
tissue that are
reasonably
likely to be 
present* 
Obtain samples
and
analyze for 
environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides* 
Each lot
received 
Receiving 
employee will 
submit sample
to quality
control staff 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the cause of
the chemical
contamination
has been
eliminated 
Test 
results 
Annual
methods
comparison to
AOAC methods
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of
preparation 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only. An actual plan should specify (1) in the Critical Limits column: the environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides that are reasonably likely to 
be present and the critical limits to be applied to each contaminant; and (2) in the Monitoring columns: the contaminants for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample collection, 
and the analytical method to be used for each contaminant. 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - QA 
PROGRAM 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 A certificate indicating that the producer 
operat
es under a third-party-audited QA 
program that covers environmental chemical 
contaminants and pesticides. The certificate 
may accompany each lot of incoming 
aquacultured fish or may be issued for each 
producer of incoming aquacultured fish as a 
continuing certification. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Certificate indicating operation under a third­
party-
audited QA program. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check for the presence of a certificate. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received is checked for the presence 
of a certi
ficate. Certificates may be issued on 
continuing (not less often than annually) or 
lot-by-lot basis. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature o
f the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 Hold the lo
t until a certificate can be 
provided; 
OR 
•	 Hold and an
alyze the lot for those 
environmental chemical contaminants and 
pesticides that are reasonably likely to be 
present. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that the supplier will 
comply with the certification controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Third-party certificates; 
AND 
•	 Records s
howing lots received and the 
presence or absence of a certificate. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review the third-party-audited QA program 
and resul
ts of audits annually; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
171 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
172 
TABLE 9-6
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - QA PROGRAM
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 5 - QA Program.” This example illustrates how an aquacultured trout processor can 
control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purpose only.
Environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, food and color additives, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
Certificate 
indicating that
the producer
operates under 
a third-party­
audited QA 
program that 
covers 
environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
Presence of a
third-party 
certificate 
Visual check for 
the presence of
a certificate 
Each lot Receiving dock 
employee 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier
will comply
with the
certification 
controls 
Certificate 
Receiving 
record 
Review the 
third-party- 
audited QA 
program and 
results of audits
annually
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 6 - SOURCE 
CONTROL FOR WILD CAUGHT FISH OTHER THAN 
MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 No fish may be harvested from an area that is 
closed t
o commercial harvesting by state, tribal, 
territorial, local, or foreign authorities because 
of concentrations of environmental chemical 
contaminants or pesticides exceeding the 
federal tolerance or action levels; 
AND 
•	 No fish may be h
arvested from an area that 
is under a consumption advisory by a, state, 
tribal, territorial, local, or foreign regulatory 
authority based on a determination by the 
authority that fish harvested from the waters 
are reasonably likely to contain contaminants 
above the federal tolerance or action levels. 
Note that many consumption advisories are 
not based on such a determination. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Location of harvest and whether the 
harves
t area is subject to closure or 
consumption advisory. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Ask the harvester for the harvest site at time 
of recei
pt, or obtain the information from the 
harvester’s catch record, where applicable; 
AND 
•	 Ask the sta
te, tribal, territorial, local, or 
foreign authorities in which your fish are 
harvested whether there are closures or 
consumption advisories that apply to the 
areas from which your fish are harvested. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature o
f the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 For fish har
vested from an area under a 
consumption advisory based on federal 
tolerance or action levels: 
Sample the lot and analyze it for the 
appropriate environmental chemical 
contaminant or pesticide. Reject the lot if 
the results exceed the federal tolerance 
or action level. 
° 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that harvesting practices 
have changed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Receiving records that document the location 
and whet
her the harvest area is subject to 
closure or consumption advisory. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
173 
 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
174 
TABLE 9-7
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 6 - SOURCE CONTROL 
FOR WILD CAUGHT FISH OTHER THAN MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 6 - Source Control for Wild Caught Fish Other Than Molluscan Shellfish.” This example 
illustrates how a wild caught bluefish processor can control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental contaminants and pesticides from the harvest area may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other 
potential hazards (e.g., scombrotoxin (histamine), metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
No fish may be harvested 
from an area that is closed to
commercial harvesting by state,
or local authorities because of
concentrations of environmental 
chemical contaminants or
pesticides exceeding the federal 
tolerance or action levels
No fish may be commercially 
harvested from an area that is 
under a consumption advisory 
by a state, local, or local 
regulatory authority based on a 
determination by the authority 
that fish harvested from the 
waters are reasonably likely to 
contain contaminants above the 
federal tolerance or action levels 
Location of
harvest and 
whether the
harvest area 
is subject to 
closure or
consumption
advisory 
Ask the
harvester for 
the harvest 
location, and 
ask state
and local
authorities the
status of the
area 
Each lot
received 
Receiving 
dock
employee 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue
use of the
supplier
until
evidence 
is obtained
that
harvesting 
practices 
have
changed 
Receiving 
record 
Review 
monitoring
and
corrective 
action 
records
within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 7 - SOURCE 
CONTROL FOR MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All containers of shellstock (in-shell 
mollusc
an shellfish) received from a 
harvester must bear a tag that discloses the 
date and place they were harvested (by state 
and site), the type and quantity of shellfish, 
and the harvester’s or harvester’s vessel 
information (i.e., the identification number 
assigned to the harvester by the shellfish 
control authority, where applicable, or if 
such identification numbers are not assigned, 
the name of the harvester or the name or 
registration number of the harvester’s vessel). 
For bulk shipments of shellstock, where the 
shellstock is not containerized, the shellstock 
must be accompanied by a bill of lading 
or other similar shipping document that 
contains the same information; 
Note: The source controls listed in this critical limit are required under 
21 CFR 123.28(c). 
OR 
•	 All contai
ners of shellstock received from 
a processor must bear a tag that discloses 
the date and place they were harvested 
(by state and site), the type and quantity of 
shellfish, and the certification number of the 
processor; 
OR 
•	 All contai
ners of shucked molluscan shellfish 
must bear a label that identifies the name, 
address, and certification number of the 
packer or repacker of the product; 
AND 
•	 All mollus
can shellfish must have been 
harvested from waters authorized for 
harvesting by a shellfish control authority. 
For U.S. federal waters, no molluscan 
shellfish may be harvested from waters that 
are closed to harvesting by an agency of the 
federal government; 
AND 
•	 All mollus
can shellfish must be from a 
harvester that is licensed as required (note 
that licensing may not be required in all 
jurisdictions) or from a processor that is 
certified by a shellfish control authority. 
Note: Only the primary processor (the processor that receives 
molluscan shellfish directly from the harvester) needs to apply controls 
relative to the identification of the harvester, the harvester’s license, or 
the approval status of the harvest waters. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The information contained on tags on 
contain
ers of incoming shellstock or on 
the bill of lading or other similar shipping 
document accompanying bulk shipments of 
shellstock and whether the harvest area is 
authorized for harvest by a shellfish control 
authority; 
AND 
•	 The licens
e of the harvester; 
OR 
•	 The inform
ation contained on labels on 
containers of incoming shucked molluscan 
shellfish. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Perform visual checks; 
AND 
•	 Ask the rele
vant shellfish control authority 
whether the harvest area is authorized for 
harvest. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For checking tags: 
Every container; ° 
AND 
•	 For checki
ng harvester licenses: 
Every delivery; ° 
OR 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
175 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 For checking labels: 
At least three containers randomly 
selected from throughout every lot. 
° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature o
f the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that harvesting and/or 
tagging practices have changed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
For shellstock: 
•	 Receiving record that documents: 
Date of harvest; ° 
AND
 
Location of harvest by state and site; 
° 
AND
 
Quantity and type of shellfish;
° 
AND 
Name of the harvester, name or 
registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel, or an identification number issued 
to the harvester by the shellfish control 
authority (for shellstock received directly 
from the harvester only); 
° 
AND 
Number and date of expiration of the 
harvester’s license, where applicable; 
° 
AND
 
Certification number of the shipper,
  
where applicable.  
° 
For shucked molluscan shellfish: 
•	 Receiving record that documents: 
° Date of receipt; 
AND 
° Quantity and type of shellfish; 
AND 
° Name and certification number of the 
packer or repacker.  
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
176 
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
177 
TABLE 9-8
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 7 - SOURCE CONTROL FOR MOLLUSCAN SHELLFISH
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 7 - Source Control for Molluscan Shellfish.” The example illustrates how a processor of 
shellstock oysters received directly from a harvester can control environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Environmental contaminants and pesticides from the harvest area may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other 
potential hazards (e.g., natural toxins and pathogens from the harvest area). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Environmental
chemical
contaminants
and pesticides 
All shellstock must be
tagged with the date
and place of harvest,
type and quantity of
shellfish, and name or 
registration number of 
the harvester’s vessel 
Information 
on incoming
shellstock tags 
Visual checks Every sack Receiving 
employee 
Reject 
untagged sacks
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
tagging practices 
have changed 
Receiving 
record 
Review 
monitoring
and
corrective 
action 
records
within
1 week of 
preparation 
All shellstock must be
from waters 
approved by the state 
shellfish control
authority 
Harvest site on 
tags 
Perform 
visual checks
and ask the
shellfish control
authority
whether
the area is
authorized for 
harvest 
Every lot Reject lots from 
unapproved waters 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
harvesting practices 
have changed 
All shellstock must be
from licensed
harvesters 
License of
harvester 
Perform visual 
checks 
Every 
delivery 
Reject lots from 
unlicensed
harvesters
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the harvester is 
properly licensed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday. As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Catfish Fa
rmers of America. 1993. Catfish 
quality assurance. Cooperative Extension 
Service Publication 1873. Mississippi State 
University, Mississippi State, MS. 
•	 Federal Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture. 
2007. Guide to drug, vaccine, and pesticide 
use in aquaculture. http://aquanic.org/jsa/ 
wgqaap/drugguide/drugguide.htm. 
•	 Gutenma
nn, W. H., J. G. Ebel, Jr., H. T. 
Kuntz, K. S. Yourstone, and D. J. Lisk. 1992. 
Residues of p,p’-DDE and mercury in lake 
trout as a function of age. Arch. Environ. 
Contam. Toxicol. 22(4):452-455. 
•	 Karl, H., I
. Lehmann, and K. Oetjen. 1998. 
Levels of chlordane compounds in fish 
muscle, -meal, -oil and -feed. Chemosphere. 
36(13):2819-2832. 
•	 Ruus, A., K
. I. Ugland, and J. U. Skaare. 
2002. Influence of trophic position on 
organochlorine concentrations and 
compositional patterns in a marine food web. 
Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 21(11):2356-2364. 
•	 Smith, A. G
., and S. D. Grangolli. 2002. 
Organochlorine chemicals in seafood: 
occurrence and health concerns. Food Chem. 
Toxicol. 40:767-779. 
•	 Striped B
ass Growers Association. 1996. 
The hybrid striped bass industry from fish 
farmer to consumer. Striped Bass Growers 
Association, P.O. Box 11280, Columbia, SC. 
•	 U.S. Env
ironmental Protection Agency. 1992. 
Water quality standards – Establishment of 
numeric criteria for priority toxic pollutants; 
states’ compliance, p. 60848-60923. In Federal 
Register, vol. 57, no. 246. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Envi
ronmental Protection Agency. 1994. 
Appendix I: list of EPA water quality criteria 
documents. In Water quality standards 
handbook: second edition. http://www.epa. 
gov/wa
terscience/standards/handbook/. 
•	 U.S. Envi
ronmental Protection Agency. 1995. 
Final water quality guidance for the Great 
Lakes System. In Federal Register, vol. 60, 
no. 56. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Env
ironmental Protection Agency. 
Updated February 2011. Residue Analytical 
Methods (RAM). http://www.epa.gov/ 
pesticides/methods/ramindex.htm. 
•	 U.S. Env
ironmental Protection Agency. 
Revised July 2006. Tolerances and exemptions 
from tolerances for pesticide chemicals in 
or on raw agricultural products. In Code 
of Federal Regulations, 40 CFR 180. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, 
DC. http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/ 
waisidx_05/40cfr180_05.html. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. 
Updated July 2009. Pesticide Analytical 
Manual (PAM). http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
ScienceResearch/LaboratoryMethods/ 
PesticideAnalysisManualPAM/default.htm. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. Updated 
January 2008. Pesticide chemical residues in 
food - enforcement criteria. In Compliance 
policy guides, sect. 575.100. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied 
Nutrition, Washington, DC. http://www.fda. 
gov/downloads/ICECI/ComplianceManuals/ 
CompliancePolicyGuidanceManual/ 
UCM186872.pdf. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
178 
 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Revised 
April 2009. Fish and fishery products. 
In Code of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 
123.3. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. http://www.access.gpo.gov/ 
nara/cfr/waisidx_06/21cfr123_06.html. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. Revised 
April 2009. Unavoidable contaminants 
in food for human consumption and 
food-packaging material. In Code of 
Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 109. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, 
DC. http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/ 
waisidx_06/21cfr109_06.html. 
•	 U.S. Trou
t Farmer’s Association. 1994. Trout 
producers quality assurance program. 
USTFA, P.O. Box 220, Charles Town, WV. 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
179 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 9: Environmental Chemical Contaminants and Pesticides 
180
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10: Methylmercury 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
As with previous editions of the “Fish and Fishery 
Products Hazards and Controls Guidance,” this 
fourth edition does not contain advice on Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) controls 
for methylmercury, except where federal, state, 
local, or foreign authorities close certain waters to 
commercial harvesting as described in Chapter 9. 
CHAPTER 10: Methylmercury 
181 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 10: Methylmercury 
182
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you can
 not 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.  
 Note: This document was corrected on August 3, 2011. The Agency corrected a typographical error appearing in the 
 April 2011 version of this document. The Agency corrected "15%" to "1.5%" so that the sentence in "Chapter 11: 
Aquaculture Drugs" now reads "Sodium sulfite Used in a 1.5% solution for 5 to 8 minutes to treat eggs in order to 
improve their hatchability."
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Use of unapproved drugs or misuse of approved  
drugs in aquacultured fish poses a potential  
human health hazard.  These substances may  
be toxic, allergenic, or carcinogenic, and/or may  
cause antibiotic resistance in pathogens that  
affect humans.   
To control this hazard, drugs for use in food 
animals, whether they are for direct medication or 
for addition to feed, generally must be approved, 
conditionally approved or index listed by FDA 
(Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act Section 
512).  Under certain conditions authorized by FDA, 
unapproved new animal drugs may be used in 
conformance with the terms of an Investigational 
New Animal Drug (INAD) application (21 CFR 511 
and FDA’s Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) 
Guide 1240.3025).  Off label use in animals of 
approved human or animal drugs is permissible 
in certain circumstances.  Drugs on the Index 
of Legally Marketed Unapproved New Animal 
Drugs for Minor Species (the Index) may not be 
used in food animals except in early nonfood life 
stages of food producing minor species in certain 
circumstances.   
Reasons for the use of drugs in aquaculture  
include the need to (1) treat and prevent disease,  
(2) control parasites, (3) affect reproduction and  
growth, and (4) provide tranquilization (e.g.,  
for weighing).  Relatively few drugs have been  
approved for aquaculture.  This factor may lead to  
the inappropriate use of unapproved drugs,  
general-purpose chemicals, or approved drugs in a  
manner that deviates from the labeled instructions. 
When a drug is approved by CVM, the conditions  
of the approval are listed on its label or in the  
labeling (21 CFR 514.1).  These conditions specify  
the species for which the drug is approved for use;  
indications (disease or other circumstances) for  
use; dosage regimen; and other limitations, such  
as route of administration and withdrawal time.   
Labeled withdrawal times must be followed to  
ensure that no harmful drug residues are present  
in the edible tissue of the animal when harvested  
for human consumption and offered for sale.   
Tolerances for some drug residues in the edible  
tissue have been established (21 CFR 556).  
Only a licensed veterinarian may legally prescribe  
a drug under conditions that are not listed on  
the label (extra-label use).  This includes: use in  
species not listed on the label; use for indications  
(disease or other conditions) not listed on the  
label; use at dosage levels, frequencies, or routes  
of administration other than those stated on the  
label; and deviation from the labeled withdrawal  
time.  A veterinarian is a person licensed by a  
state, territory, or foreign government to practice  
veterinary  medicine.   
The extra-label use restrictions are fully  
explained in 21 CFR 530.  Information on the  
new animal drug approval process and for  
other information on the laws, regulations  
and policies pertaining to drugs can be found  
on FDA’s internet website, http://www.fda.gov/ 
AnimalVeterinary/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/ 
Aquaculture/default.htm. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
183 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Approved aquaculture drugs 
FDA-approved aquaculture drugs, with their  
approved sponsor, species for which they have  
been approved and required withdrawal times  
are listed below.  Additional details on conditions  
of use (e.g., dosage levels) can be obtained from  
the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) as cited  
below; the labeling for the drug; the FDA CVM  
Website, (http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/ 
DevelopmentApprovalProcess/Aquaculture/ 
ucm132954.htm). 
FDA’s determination that these substances are 
approved aquaculture drugs does not exempt 
facilities from complying with other federal, 
state, tribal, territorial and local environmental 
requirements.  For example, in the United States, 
facilities using these substances would still be 
required to comply with the National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System requirements. 
Chorionic gonadotropin 
Chorulon
® 
Chorulon®, supplied by Intervet, Inc., 
Roseland, NJ, is approved for use as an aid 
in improving spawning function in male 
and female brood finfish.  The drug may be 
administered for up to three doses.  The total 
dose should not exceed 25,000 I.U. chorionic 
gonadotropin in fish intended for human 
consumption.  Federal law restricts this 
drug to use by or on the order of a licensed 
veterinarian (21 CFR 522.1081).  Because 
residues are expected to be well below the 
safe concentration in the edible portion of 
fish, there is no tolerance level set for residues 
of gonadotropin in fish tissue 21 CFR 556.304). 
Formalin solution 
Paracide-F
® 
Paracide-F®, supplied by Argent Laboratories, 
Redmond, WA, is approved for use as 
follows: in salmon, trout, catfish, largemouth 
bass, and bluegill for the control of external 
protozoa (Ichthyophthirius spp., Chilodonella 
spp., Costia spp., Scyphidia spp., Epistylis 
spp., and Trichodina spp.) and monogenetic 
trematodes (Cleidodiscus spp., Gyrodactylus 
spp., and Dactylogyrus spp.); and on the eggs 
of salmon, trout, and esocids for the control 
of fungi of the family Saprolegniaceae (21 
CFR 529.1030).  There is no mandatory 
withdrawal time prior to harvest and 
no residue tolerance (formalin does not 
bioaccumulate in animals).  This drug is 
approved as an over-the-counter (OTC) 
product, and a prescription is not required.  
Parasite-S
® , Formacide-B® and Formalin-F® 
Parasite-S® is supplied by Western Chemical, 
Inc., Ferndale, WA.  Formacide-B® is 
supplied by B.L. Mitchell, Inc., Leland, 
MS.  Formalin-F® is supplied by Natchez 
Animal Supply Company, Natchez, MS. 
Each is approved for use to control external 
protozoan parasites (Chilodonella spp., Costia 
spp., Epistylis spp., Ichthyophthirius spp., 
Scyphidia spp., and Trichodina spp.) and 
monogenetic trematodes (Cleidodiscus spp., 
Dactylogyrus spp., and Gyrodactylus spp.) 
on all finfish species; external protozoan 
parasites (Bodo spp., Epistylis spp., and 
Zoothamnium spp.) on Penaeid shrimp; and 
fungi of the family Saprolegniaceae on the 
eggs of all finfish species (21 CFR 529.1030). 
There is no mandatory withdrawal time 
prior to food animal harvest and no residue 
tolerance (formalin does not bioaccumulate in 
animals).  These drugs are approved as OTC 
products, and a prescription is not required. 
Florfenicol 
Aquaflor
® Type A Medicated Article 
Aquaflor® Type A is supplied by Intervet, 
Inc., Millsboro DE/ Schering-Plough Animal 
Health Corporation, Roseland, NJ, and is 
approved for use in medicated feed for the 
control of mortality due to enteric septicemia 
of channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) 
associated with Edwardsiella ictaluri, control 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
184 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
of mortality in freshwater-reared salmonids 
due to coldwater disease associated with 
Flavobacterium psychrophilum, and control of 
mortality in freshwater-reared salmonids due 
to furunculosis associated with Aeromonas 
salmonicida. The minimum withdrawal time 
before harvest is 12 days for catfish and 15 
days for salmonids (21 CFR 558.261).  The 
tolerance level for florfenicol amine (the 
marker residue) in muscle is 1 ppm (21 CFR 
556.283).  The product is restricted to use by 
or on the order of a licensed veterinarian (21 
CFR 558.261).  Extra-label use of medicated 
feed containing florfenicol is prohibited (21 
CFR 558.6(a)(4) and (6)). 
Aquaflor
® CA1 
Aquaflor® CA1 is supplied by Intervet, Inc./ 
Schering-Plough Animal Health Corporation, 
Roseland, NJ, and is approved for use in 
medicated feed for the control of mortality in 
catfish due to columnaris disease associated 
with Flavobacterium columnare. The drug 
can be used at any stage of production, from 
fingerling to food fish, as the sole ration 
for 10 consecutive days.  The minimum 
withdrawal time before harvest is 12 days. 
The product is restricted to use by or on 
the order of a licensed veterinarian (21 CFR 
516.1215) .  Extra-label use of medicated feed 
containing florfenicol is prohibited (21 CFR 
558.6(a)(4) and (6)).  Because Aquaflor
® CAI 
is a conditionally approved new animal drug, 
it extra-label use is also prohibited by 21 
U.S.C. 360ccc(a)(1). 
Tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222) 
Finquel
® and Tricaine-S 
Finquel® is supplied by Argent Laboratories, 
Redmond, WA, and Tricaine-S is supplied 
by Western Chemical, Inc., Ferndale, WA, 
Tricaine-S.  This drug is approved for 
use to temporary immobilization of fish, 
amphibians, and other aquatic cold-blooded 
animals.  Tricaine methanesulfonate has 
been recognized as a valuable tool for the 
proper handling of these animals during 
manual spawning (fish stripping), weighing, 
measuring, marking, surgical operations, and 
transport.  Use in fish intended for human 
consumption is restricted to the following 
families: Ictaluridae (catfish), Salmonidae 
(salmon and trout), Esocidae (pike), and 
Percidae (perch).  There is a mandatory 21­
day withdrawal time before harvest.  In other 
non-food, aquatic, cold-blooded animals, 
the drug should be limited to hatchery or 
laboratory use (21 CFR 529.2503).  These 
drugs are approved as OTC products, and 
a prescription is not required.  There is no 
tolerance level set for residues in fish tissue. 
Oxytetracycline 
Terramycin
® 200 for Fish (oxytetracycline 
dihydrate) Type A Medicated Article 
Terramycin® 200 for Fish (oxytetracycline 
dihydrate) Type A Medicated Article 
is supplied by Phibro Animal Health, 
Ridgefield Park, NJ.  Terramycin
® 200 for 
Fish is approved for use to treat bacterial 
hemorrhagic septicemia caused by 
Aeromonas liquefaciens and pseudomonas 
disease in catfish.  For salmonids, 
Terramycin
® 200 for Fish is approved 
for use to control ulcer disease caused 
by Hemophilius piscium, furunculosis 
caused by Aeromonas salmonicida, 
bacterial hemorrhagic septicemia caused 
by Aeromonas liquefaciens, pseudomonas 
disease and for control of mortality due 
to coldwater disease associated with 
Flavobacterium psychrophilium. This drug is 
also approved for use to mark skeletal tissue. 
For lobster, Terramycin
® 200 for Fish is 
approved for use to control gaffkemia caused 
by Aerococcus viridians. Withdrawal times 
vary with indication as follows: for marking 
skeletal tissue in Pacific salmon, 7 days; for 
disease control in salmonids, 21 days; catfish, 
21 days; lobster, 30 days (21 CFR 558.450). 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
185 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OxyMarine™, Oxytetracycline
 
HCl Soluble Powder-343, 
Terramycin-343, TETROXY Aquatic
 
OxyMarine ™ is supplied by Alpharma, 
Inc., Fort Lee, NJ.  Oxytetracycline HCl 
Soluble Powder-343 is supplied by Teva 
Animal Health, Inc., St. Joseph, MO. 
Terramycin-343 is supplied by Aquatic 
Health Resources.  TETROXY Aquatic is 
supplied by Cross Vetpharm Group Ltd., 
Dublin, Ireland.  Each of these drugs is 
administered by immersion, approved for 
use to mark skeletal tissue of all finfish fry 
and fingerlings as an aid in identification. 
These drugs are approved as OTC products, 
and a prescription is not required.  A 
tolerance level of 2 ppm in muscle tissue (as 
the sum of tetracycline residues, including 
oxytetracycline, chlortetracycline, and 
tetracycline) has been established for all 
finfish and lobster (21 CFR 556.500). 
Hydrogen peroxide 
35% PEROX-AID
® 
35% PEROX-AID®, supplied by Eka 
Chemicals, Inc., Marietta, GA, is approved 
for the control mortality in freshwater-reared 
finfish eggs due to saprolegniasis; freshwater-
reared salmonids due to bacterial gill disease; 
and freshwater-reared coolwater finfish and 
channel catfish due to external columnaris 
disease.  This drug is approved as an OTC 
product, and a prescription is not required. 
There are no limitations on acceptable daily 
intake; there is no required withdrawal time; 
and no tolerance has been set for residues in 
fish tissue.  However, as with all new animal 
drugs, a licensed veterinarian is required to 
prescribe an extra-label use of 35% PEROX­
AID
® to treat diseases or species not listed on 
the product label (21 CFR 529.1150). 
Sulfamerazine 
Sulfamerazine, supplied by Alpharma, Inc., 
Bridgewater, NJ, is approved for use only in 
trout (rainbow, brook, and brown) to control 
furunculosis.  It may be used for treatment 
not more than 14 days.  The withdrawal time 
is 21 days before harvest for marketing or 
stocking in stream open to fishing (21 CFR 
558.582).  A tolerance of zero is established 
for residues of sulfamerazine in the edible 
flesh (21 CFR 556.660). 
Sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim combination 
Romet-30
® 
Romet-30®, supplied by Pharmaq AS,  
Overhalla, Norway, is approved for use only  
in medicated feed only for control of enteric  
septicemia of catfish caused by Edwardsiella  
ictaluri and furunculosis in salmonids  
(trout and salmon) caused by Aeromonas  
salmonicida.  Required withdrawal times  
are as follows:  salmonids, 42 days; catfish,  
3 days (21 CFR 558.575).  The withdrawal  
time for catfish is shorter because any  
residues that might be present in the skin are  
removed during processing.  The tolerance  
for Sulfadimethoxine and ormetoprim in  
the flesh is 0.1 ppm for each drug (21 CFR  
556.490 and 556.640).   
•	 FDA low regulatory priority aquaculture 
drugs 
CVM has identified a number of unapproved 
aquaculture drugs that are of low regulatory 
priority when used in food fish.  The 
following list identifies these compounds 
and provides their indicated use and usage 
levels (CVM’s Policy and Procedures Manual 
Attachment: “Enforcement Priorities for Drug 
use in Aquaculture” (Guide 1240.4200) (http:// 
www.fda.
gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/ 
GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/ 
PoliciesProceduresManual/UCM046931.pdf). 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
186 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The agency does not intend to take enforcement  
action against low regulatory priority substances  
if the following conditions are met:  (1) the  
substances are used for the stated indications;  
(2) the substances are used at the stated levels;  
(3) the substances are used according to good  
management practices; (4) the product is of an  
appropriate grade for use in food animals; and  
(5) use of these products is not likely to result in  
an adverse effect on the environment. 
The agency
’s enforcement position on the use 
of these substances should not be considered an 
approval, or an affirmation of their safety and 
effectiveness.  The agency reserves the right to 
take a different position on the use of any or all 
of these substances at some time in the future. 
FDA’s determination that these substances are 
new animal drugs of low regulatory priority 
does not exempt facilities from complying with 
other federal, state, tribal, territorial and local 
environmental requirements.  For example, in 
the United States, facilities using these substances 
would still be required to comply with the 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
requirements. 
Acetic acid 
Used in a 1,000 to 2,000 ppm dip for 1 to 10 
minutes as a parasitide for fish. 
Calcium chloride 
Used to increase water calcium concentration 
to ensure proper egg hardening. Dosages used 
would be those necessary to raise calcium 
concentration to 10 to 20 ppm CaCO
3. Used up 
to 150 ppm indefinitely to increase the hardness 
of water for holding and transporting fish in 
order to enable fish to maintain osmotic balance. 
Calcium oxide 
Used as an external protozoacide for fingerlings 
to adult fish at a concentration of 2,000 mg/L for 
5 seconds. 
Carbon dioxide gas 
Used for anesthetic purposes in fish. 
Fuller’s earth 
Used to reduce the adhesiveness of fish eggs to 
improve hatchability. 
Garlic (whole form) 
Used for control of helminth and sea lice 
infestations in marine salmonids at all life stages. 
Ice 
Used to reduce metabolic rate of fish during 
transport. 
Magnesium sulfate 
Used to treat external monogenic trematode 
infestations and external crustacean infestations 
in freshwater fish species at all life stages.  Fish 
are immersed in a 30,000 mg MgSO
4/L and 7,000 
mg NaCl/L solution for 5 to 10 minutes. 
Onion (whole form) 
Used to treat external crustacean parasites and to 
deter sea lice from infesting the external surface 
of salmonids at all life stages. 
Papain 
Used in a 0.2% solution to remove the gelatinous 
matrix of fish egg masses in order to improve 
hatchability and decrease the incidence of 
disease. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
187 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Potassium chloride 
Used as an aid in osmoregulation; relieves 
stress and prevents shock.  Dosages used would 
be those necessary to increase chloride ion 
concentration to 10 to 2,000 mg/L. 
Povidone iodine 
Used in a 100 ppm solution for 10 minutes as an 
egg surface disinfectant during and after water 
hardening. 
Sodium bicarbonate 
Used at 142 to 642 ppm for 5 minutes as a means 
of introducing carbon dioxide into the water to 
anesthetize fish. 
Sodium chloride 
Used in a 0.5% to 1% solution for an indefinite 
period as an osmoregulatory aid for the relief 
of stress and prevention of shock; and in a 3% 
solution for 10 to 30 minutes as a parasitide. 
Sodium sulfite 
Used in a 1.5% solution for 5 to 8 minutes to treat 
eggs in order to improve their hatchability. 
Thiamine hydrochloride 
Used to prevent or treat thiamine deficiency in 
salmonids.  Eggs are immersed in an aqueous 
solution of up to 100 ppm for up to 4 hours 
during water hardening.  Sac fry are immersed in 
an aqueous solution of up to 1,000 ppm for up to 
1 hour. 
Urea and tannic acid 
Used to denature the adhesive component of 
fish eggs at concentrations of 15g urea and 
20g NaCl/5 liters of water for approximately 6 
minutes, followed by a separate solution of 0.75 
g tannic acid/5 liters of water for an additional 6 
minutes.  These amounts will treat approximately 
400,000 eggs. 
•	 FDA high enforcement priority aquaculture 
drugs 
CVM has identified a number of drugs and 
families of drugs historically used in fish without 
FDA approval that are of high enforcement 
priority.  They should not be used in fish that 
is to be consumed, unless a sponsor obtains 
an approval or index listing for them.  The 
following list identifies these compounds 
(CVM Program Policy and Procedures Manual 
Attachment: “Enforcement Priorities for Drug 
Use in Aquaculture” (Guide 1240.4200) (http:// 
www.fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/ 
GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/ 
PoliciesProceduresManual/UCM046931.pdf ): 
•	 Chloramphenicol; 
•	 Nitrofurans; 
•	 Fluoroquinolones and Quinolones; 
•	 Malachite Green; 
•	 Steroid Hormones. 
•	 Drugs prohibited for extra-label use 
The following drugs and families of drugs are 
prohibited for extra-label use in food-producing 
animals (21 CFR 530.41(a)): 
•	 Chloramphenicol; 
•	 Clenbuterol; 
•	 Diethylstilbestrol (DES); 
•	 Dimetridazole, Ipronidazole, and other 
Nitroimidazoles; 
•	 Furazolidone, and Nitrofurazone; 
•	 Fluoroquinolones; 
•	 Glycopeptides. 
None of these drugs and families of drugs 
has been approved use in fish.  Additional 
information on aquaculture-related topics can be 
obtained from FDA/CVM at: http://www.fda.gov/ 
cvm/aqualibtoc.htm. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
188 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether aquaculture drugs are a 
significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	  Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
aquaculture drugs will be introduced at this 
processing step? 
Under ordinary circumstances, if you 
are a primary (first) processor, it would 
be reasonably likely that unsafe levels 
of aquaculture drugs could enter the 
process at the receiving step of any type of 
aquacultured fish, including: 
•	 Finfish; 
•	 Crustaceans; 
•	 Other aquatic food animals,
 
such as alligator.
 
Under o
rdinary circumstances it would also 
be reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
aquaculture drugs could enter the process 
during aquatic holding (e.g., live lobster in 
pounds) or transport of live fish. 
Under ordinary circumstances, it would 
not be reasonably likely to expect that 
aquaculture drugs could enter the process 
during the receiving of wild-caught fish. 
Currently, FDA is not aware of drug use in 
the grow-out of molluscan shellfish. 
If you are receiving fish (other than live fish) 
from another processor, you would not need 
to identify aquaculture drugs as a significant 
hazard.  The primary (first) processor should 
have fully controlled this hazard. 
2.	  Can unsafe levels of aquaculture drugs that are 
reasonably likely to occur be eliminated or reduced 
to an acceptable level at this processing step? 
Aquaculture drugs should be considered 
a significant hazard at any processing step 
at a primary processor where a preventive 
measure is or can be used to eliminate the 
hazard or to reduce the likelihood of its 
occurrence to an acceptable level.  Preventive 
measures for the hazard of aquaculture drugs 
used in aquaculture operations and during 
live transportation can include: 
•	 Conducting on-farm visits to review 
drug usage (other than INADs) before 
receipt of the produc
t, coupled with 
a supplier’s certificate that any INADs 
used were used in conformance 
with the application requirements 
and appropriate verification; 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, drug usage 
records (other than INADs),
 coupled 
with a supplier’s certificate that any 
INADs used were used in conformance 
with the application requirements 
and appropriate verification; 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, the 
producer’s lot-b
y-lot certification 
of proper drug usage, including 
INAD usage, coupled with 
appropriate verification;
 
•	 Conducting, at time of receipt,
 
drug residue testing; 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, evidence 
(e.g.,
 a third-party certificate) that 
the producer operates under a third­
party-audited Quality Assurance (QA) 
program for aquaculture drug use. 
Note: INAD records are confidential unless an exception is made by 
the sponsor of the drug research. Thus, review of INAD drug usage 
records by the processor may not be practical in certain situations.  
Written certification, on a lot-by-lot basis, from the producer 
to the processor stating that INAD usage is in accordance with 
authorizations from FDA/CVM is a suitable alternative. 
These preventive measures are ordinarily 
employed at either the receiving step or the 
pre-harvest step. 
Preventive measures for the control of 
aquaculture drugs used during aquatic 
holding (e.g. lobster pounds) can include 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
189 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
control
led application of animal drugs in a  
manner consistent with:  
•	 Established withdrawal times; 
•	 Labeled instructions for use; 
•	 Conditions for extra-label use of FDA-
approved dr
ugs, under a veterinarian’s 
supervision and in accordance with 
FDA regulations and guidelines; 
•	 Conditions specified in the FDA list of 
low regulatory priority aquaculture drugs; 
•	 Conditions of an INAD application. 
These preventive measures are ordinarily  
applied at the holding step. 
In the case of a
n integrated operation, where 
fish processing and farming, and perhaps 
feed manufacture, are performed by the 
same firm, it may be possible and desirable 
to exercise preventive measures early in the 
process (ideally, at feed manufacture), rather 
than at receipt of the fish at the processing 
plant.  Such preventive measures will not be 
covered in this guidance document. 
•	 Intended use 
For aquaculture drugs, it is unlikely that the 
intended use of the product will affect the 
significance of the hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for the hazard of 
aquaculture drugs. 
Is the hazard the result of the use of aquaculture drugs 
during the raising of fish (i.e., aquaculture) or during 
aquatic holding (e.g., lobster pounds) or transport of live 
fish? 
1.	  If the hazard is the result of aquaculture, do you 
have a relationship with the grower that enables 
you to visit the farm before receipt of the fish?  
a.	  
If you have such a relationship with the 
grower, then you should identify a pre-
harvest step as the CCP for aquaculture 
drugs.   The preventive measure for this 
type of control is: 
•	 Conducting on-farm visits to 
review drug usage, coupled with 
a supplier’s cer
tificate that any 
INAD used is used in accordance 
with food use authorization 
and appropriate verification. 
Example: 
A primary processor of aquacultured 
catfish that regularly purchases from 
the same grower should visit the 
grower before the fish are harvested 
and review drug usage practices and 
records.  The processor should also 
receive a guarantee that any INAD 
used is used in conformance with the 
food use authorization requirements. 
The processor should combine this 
monitoring procedure with quarterly 
raw material testing for verification 
and should set the CCP at the pre-
harvest step. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 1 - On-
Farm Visits.” 
b.	  If you have no such relationship with 
the grower, then you should identify the 
receiving step as the CCP for aquaculture 
drugs.  At the receiving step, you should 
exercise one of the following preventive 
measures: 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, the 
producer’s lot-by-lot cer
tification 
of proper drug usage, coupled 
with appropriate verification. 
Example: 
A primary processor of aquacultured 
shrimp that purchases raw material 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
190 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
shrimp through various brokers 
should receive lot-by-lot certificates 
from the producers.  The certificates 
should state that all drugs were used 
in conformance with applicable FDA 
regulations and labeled instructions. 
The processor should combine this 
monitoring procedure with quarterly 
raw material testing for verification 
and should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 2 - 
Supplier’s Certification.” 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, drug 
usage records (other than INADs), 
coupled with a supplier’
s lot-by­
lot certificate that any INAD used 
was used in conformance with the 
use authorization requirements 
and appropriate verification. 
Example: 
A primary processor of aquacultured 
shrimp that purchases raw material 
shrimp through various brokers 
should receive records of drug 
usage (other than INADs) from 
the producers when the product is 
delivered. Additionally, the processor 
should receive a lot-by-lot certificate 
stating that any INAD used was 
used in conformance with the food 
use authorization requirements.  
The processor should combine this 
monitoring procedure with quarterly 
raw material testing for verification 
and should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 3 - 
Records of Drug Use.” 
•	 Conducting, at time of receipt, drug 
screening on all lots for the presence 
of approv
ed or unapproved drugs. 
This screening can be performed by 
rapid analytical methods that may 
indicate the presence of a family of 
drugs, rather than any specific drug. 
If the rapid screening test indicates 
that a family of drugs is present, 
further testing and/or follow-up with 
the supplier could be necessary. 
Note: A limited number of drug screening tests for 
aquaculture drugs are available. Tests are not available to 
assay for all drugs that might be used in all aquacultured 
species. Processors should be cautioned that tests that 
have not been validated may be unreliable. These tests 
may fail to detect a residue or may give a false positive. 
Processors should ensure that the tests that they intend 
to use have been validated and are appropriate for the 
species and tissue to be tested. 
Example: 
A primary processor of aquacultured 
shrimp that purchases raw material 
shrimp through various brokers 
should screen all incoming lots of 
shrimp with a series of validated 
rapid tests that target the families 
of drugs that are reasonably likely 
to be used during grow-out (e.g., 
chloramphenicol, nitrofurans, and 
fluoroquinolones).  The processor 
should set the CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 4 - 
Drug Residue Testing.” 
•	 Reviewing, at time of receipt, 
evidence (e.g., continuing or lot­
b
y-lot third- party certificate) that 
the producer operates under a 
third-party-audited QA program 
that covers aquaculture drug use. 
Example: 
A primary processor of aquacultured 
trout that regularly purchases 
raw material trout from the same 
grower should obtain a third-party 
certificate, valid for 1 year (i.e., 
continuing certification), that attests 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
191 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the grower operates under a QA 
program th
at covers aquaculture 
drug use.  The processor should set the 
CCP at receiving. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 5 - 
Quality Assurance Program.” 
2.	  If the hazard is the result of aquatic holding (e.g., 
lobster pounds), then you should identify the 
holding step as the CCP for aquaculture drugs. 
The preventive measure for this type of control is: 
•	 Applying animal drugs in a 
manner consistent with: 
Established withdrawal times; ° 
Labeled instructions for use; ° 
Conditions for extra-label use 
of FDA-approved drugs under a 
veterinarian’s supervision and in 
accordance with FDA regulations and 
guidances; 
° 
Conditions specified in the FDA “low 
regulatory priority aquaculture drug”
  
list; 
° 
Conditions of an INAD food use 
authorization. 
° 
Example: 
A pr
imary processor that uses 
oxytetracycline in the holding of live 
lobster in a lobster pound should 
use the drug as a medicated feed in 
accordance with labeled instructions 
and should document the withdrawal 
time of 30 days before selling.  The 
processor should set the CCP at 
holding. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this document 
as “Control Strategy Example 6 - 
Control During Holding.” 
3.	  If the hazard is the result of transportation of live 
fish, then you should identify the receiving step 
as the CCP for aquaculture drugs. In this case, 
you should refer to described in Control Strategy 
Examples 2 through 5 for guidance. However, 
if live transportation is on your own truck, you 
should identify the transportation step as the 
CCP, and refer to Control Strategy Example 6 for 
guidance. 
Example: 
A primary processor that receives 
live basa from a broker on the 
broker’s truck should receive lot­
by-lot certificates from the broker.  
The certificates should state that all 
drugs were used in conformance 
with applicable 
regulations and 
labeled instructions.  The processor 
should combine this monitoring 
procedure with quarterly raw 
material testing for verification 
and should set the CCP at 
receiving. 
Example: 
A primary processor that receives 
live catfish from the growers on 
the processor’s own truck and uses 
drugs to control animal health 
during transportation (e.g., carbon 
dioxide as an anesthetizing agent 
at levels appropriate for the purpose) 
should control drug use during 
transportation and should set the CCP 
at transportation. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides six control 
strategies for aquaculture drugs.  You may select 
a control strategy that is different from those 
which are suggested provided it complies with 
the requirements of the applicable food safety 
laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
On-farm visit 
Supplier’s certification 
Records of drug use 
Drug residue testing 
Quality assurance program 
Control during holding  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - ON-FARM VISITS 
Set Critical Limits. 
Aquaculture drugs are used on food-producing 
fish only if they have been: 
•	 Approved b
y FDA or granted a conditional 
approval by FDA and used in accordance 
with all labeled conditions; 
OR 
•	 Approved b
y FDA and used in an extra-label 
manner under a veterinarian’s supervision in 
accordance with FDA regulations; 
OR 
•	 Put on the FDA l
ist of low regulatory priority 
aquaculture drugs and used according to the 
provisions in the list; 
OR 
•	 Used in food fi
sh as an INAD subjected 
to an investigational new animal drug 
exemption under 21 CFR Part 511 and used 
according to the requirements of the food 
use authorization; 
AND 
•	 Verified by a c
ertificate from the producer 
indicating that any investigational new 
drug used is subject to an investigational 
new animal drug exemption under 21 
CFR Part 511, that fish intended for human 
consumption is subject to a food use 
authorization, and that the INAD is used 
in the fish according to the food use 
authorization requirements. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 On-farm drug usage procedures; 
AND 
•	 Certifica
te indicating proper INAD usage. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Survey farm husbandry procedures, ask 
questio
ns, and review drug usage records; 
AND 
•	 Visual chec
k for presence of INAD certificate 
of proper use. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 At least once per year for each aquaculture 
site. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of t
he controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Do not have the product shipped from the 
producti
on site for processing. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that drug treatment 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
193 
 
 
 
practices have changed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 On-site audit report; 
AND 
•	 INAD cert
ificate of proper use. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Collect a representative sample of the raw 
materi
al, in-process product, or finished 
product at least quarterly, and analyze for 
those drug residues that are reasonably likely 
to be present; 
AND 
•	 Periodi
cally verify the adequacy of the 
testing methods and equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained 
using an Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC) or equivalent method, or 
by analyzing proficiency samples); 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, verification, and 
corrective action records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
195 
TABLE 11-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - ON-FARM VISITS
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - On-Farm Visits.”  This example illustrates how
a primary processor of farm-raised catfish can control aquaculture drugs.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Pre-
harvest 
Aquaculture 
drugs 
Aquaculture drugs are used on fish only if 
the drugs have been 
approved by FDA or granted conditional 
approval by FDA and used in accordance 
with all labeled conditions;
approved by FDA and used in an extra-label 
manner under a veterinarian’s supervision in 
accordance with FDA regulations; 
put on the list of low regulatory priority 
aquaculture drugs and used in accordance 
with the provisions in the list; or use in food 
fish as an INAD subject to an investigational 
new animal drug exemption under 21 CFR 
Part 511 and used in accordance with the 
requirements of the food use authorization 
On-farm 
drug usage 
procedures 
Survey 
farm 
husbandry 
procedures,
ask
questions,
and review 
drug 
records 
Once
per year 
for each 
aquaculture
site 
Field
agent 
Reject the 
product
Do not
have the 
product 
shipped
from the
production 
site for 
processing.
Discontinue
use of the
supplier
until
evidence 
is obtained
that drug 
treatment
practices 
have
changed 
On-site
audit
report 
Collect a 
representative sample of 
the raw material 
quarterly, and 
analyze for those 
drug residues that are 
reasonably likely to be 
present*
Periodically verify 
the adequacy of the
testing methods and
equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with
those obtained using an
Association of Official 
Analytical Chemists 
(AOAC)
Review 
monitoring, verification,
and corrective action 
records within 1 week of 
preparation 
Certificate from the producer indicating 
that any investigational new drug used in 
fish intended for human consumption is 
subject to an investigational new animal 
drug exemption under 21 CFR Part 511 
and that the INAD is used according to the
requirements of the food use authorization 
Certificate 
indicating
proper
INAD
usage 
Visual 
check 
Once
per year 
for each 
aquaculture
site 
Field
agent 
Certificate 
of INAD
usage 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only.  An actual plan should specify in the Verification column:  the aquaculture drugs for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample
collection, and the analytical method to be used for each drug 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SUPPLIER’S 
CERTIFICATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 Certificate proper drug usage accompanying 
each lot of in
coming aquacultured fish. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Presence of a certificate indicating proper 
drug usa
ge. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check for presence of certificate of 
proper us
e. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of t
he controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 Hold the lot u
ntil a certificate can be 
provided; 
OR 
•	 Hold and ana
lyze the lot for those 
aquaculture drugs that are reasonably likely 
to be present. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that the supplier will 
comply with the certification controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Copy of certificates; 
AND 
•	 Receivin
g record showing lots received and 
presence or absence of a certificate of proper 
use. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Collect a representative sample of the raw 
materia
l, in-process product, or finished 
product at least quarterly, and analyze for 
those drug residues that are reasonably likely 
to be present; 
AND 
•	 Periodic
ally verify the adequacy of the 
testing methods and equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained 
using an Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC) or equivalent method, or 
by analyzing proficiency samples); 
AND 
•	 Review mon
itoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
196 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
197 
TABLE 11-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - SUPPLIER’S CERTIFICATION
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Supplier’s Certification.”  This example illustrates how a primary processor of pond-
raised shrimp can control aquaculture drugs. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Aquaculture 
drugs 
Certificate 
indicating
proper
drug usage 
accompanying
all lots of
incoming pond-
raised shrimp 
Presence of
a certificate 
indicating
proper drug 
usage 
Visual
check 
Each lot
received 
Receiving 
dock
employee 
Reject the lot
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier
will comply
with the
certification 
controls 
Producer’s drug 
usage certificate
Receiving 
record 
Collect a 
representative 
sample of the raw 
material quarterly,
and analyze for 
those drug residues 
that are reasonably
likely to be present* 
Periodically verify 
the adequacy of the
testing methods and
equipment (e.g., by 
comparing
results with those
obtained using an
Association of
Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC)
Review monitoring,
corrective action,
and verification 
records within 1
week of 
preparation 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only.  An actual plan should specify in the Verification column:  the aquaculture drugs for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample
collection, and the analytical method to be used for each drug 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - RECORDS OF 
DRUG USE 
Set Critical Limits. 
Drug usage records for each delivery that show 
aquaculture drugs were used on food–producing 
fish only if the drugs have been: 
•	 Approved b
y FDA or granted conditional 
approval by FDA and used in accordance 
with all labeled conditions; 
OR 
•	 Approved b
y FDA and used in an extra-label 
manner under a veterinarian’s supervision in 
accordance with FDA regulations; 
OR 
•	 Put on the lis
t of low regulatory priority 
aquaculture drugs and used according to the 
provisions in the list; 
AND 
Lot-by-lot certificate from the producer indicating 
that any investigational new drug used in fish 
intended for human consumption is subjected to 
an investigational new animal drug exemption 
under 21 CFR Part 511 and that the INAD is used 
according to the requirements of the food use 
authorization. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Records of on-farm drug use; 
AND 
•	 Certifica
te indicating proper INAD usage. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check of drug use records and INAD 
certific
ate of proper use. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of t
he controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidenc
e is obtained that drug treatment 
practices have changed and/or the producer 
will comply with the certification controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Producer’s drug records; 
AND 
•	 INAD certi
ficate of proper use; 
AND 
•	 Receivin
g record showing lots received and 
presence or absence of a certificate. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Collect a representative sample of the raw 
materia
l, in-process product, or finished 
product at least quarterly, and analyze for 
those drug residues that are reasonably likely 
to be present; 
AND 
•	 Periodic
ally verify the adequacy of the 
testing methods and equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained 
using an Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC) or equivalent method, or 
by analyzing proficiency samples); 
AND 
•	 Review mon
itoring, verification, and 
corrective action records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
199 
TABLE 11-3
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - RECORDS OF DRUG USE
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3 - Records of Drug Use.”  This example illustrates how a pond-raised shrimp processor
can control aquaculture drugs. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., chemical 
contaminants). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Aquaculture 
drugs 
Drug usage records for each delivery 
that show that drugs were used on 
fish only if the drugs have been 
approved by FDA or granted a 
conditional approval by FDA and 
used in accordance with all labeled
conditions; approved by FDA and 
used in an extra-label manner under 
a veterinarian’s supervision in 
accordance with FDA regulations; or
put on the list of low regulatory 
priority aquaculture drugs and used 
according to the provisions on the list 
Records 
of on-
farm drug 
usage 
Visual
check 
Each lot
received 
Production 
supervisor 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence is 
obtained that drug 
treatment practices 
have changed 
Grower’s 
drug 
usage
records
Receiving 
record 
Collect a 
representative sample of 
the raw material quarterly,
and analyze for those drug 
residues that are reasonably
likely to be present*
Periodically verify the 
adequacy of the testing
methods and equipment
(e.g., by comparing results 
with those obtained using
an Association of Official 
Analytical Chemists (AOAC)
Review monitoring,
verification, and corrective 
action records within 1 
week of preparation 
Lot-by-lot certificate from the 
producer indicating that any
investigational new drug used in fish 
intended for human consumption 
is subject to an investigational new 
animal drug exemption under 21 CFR 
Part 511 and that the INAD is used 
according to the requirements of the
food use authorization 
Certificate 
indicating
proper
INAD
usage 
Visual
check 
Each lot
received 
Production 
supervisor 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier will
comply with
the certification 
requirements 
Certificate 
of INAD
usage
Receiving 
record 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only.  An actual plan should specify in the Verification column:  the aquaculture drugs for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample
collection, and the analytical method to be used for each drug 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - DRUG 
RESIDUE TESTING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 No fish may contain a residue of an 
unappr
oved drug (other than for those 
drugs used as an INAD and according to the 
requirements of the food use authorization 
or used in accordance with the criteria 
specified in the list of low regulatory priority 
aquaculture drugs); 
AND 
•	 No fish may co
ntain a residue level of an 
approved drug that is above FDA tolerance 
for that drug.  
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Fish edible flesh for those drug residues that 
are reaso
nably likely to occur. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Obtain samples and test for drugs using 
rapid sc
reening methods or other validated 
analytical methods. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who is qualified by training or 
experie
nce to perform the analyses. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that drug treatment 
practices have changed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Test results. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Periodically verify the adequacy of the 
testin
g methods and equipment (e.g., by 
comparing results with those obtained 
using an Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC) or equivalent method, or 
by analyzing proficiency samples). 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action and 
verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed; 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
201 
TABLE 11-4
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - DRUG RESIDUE TESTING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4 - Drug Residue Testing.”  This example illustrates how a primary processor of farm-
raised catfish can control aquaculture drugs. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Aquaculture 
drugs 
No fish may 
contain residues
of unapproved 
drugs (other than 
those used as an
INAD subject to 
an investigational 
new animal drug 
exemption under 
21 CFR Part511 
and according
to requirements
of the food use 
authorization or
included on the list
of low regulatory 
priority aquaculture
drugs)*
No fish may 
contain a residue
level of an 
approved drug 
that is above FDA 
tolerance for that 
drug* 
Fish edible
fl esh for drug 
residues* 
Obtain samples
and analyze
for drugs using 
rapid screening 
methods or
other analytical 
methods* 
Each lot
received 
Quality
assurance 
personnel 
Reject the lot
Discontinue use
of the supplier
until evidence 
is obtained
that drug 
treatment
practices 
have changed 
Analytical 
results 
Periodically 
verify the 
adequacy of the
testing methods
and equipment
(e.g., by 
comparing
results with
those obtained
using an
Association
of Official 
Analytical 
Chemists
(AOAC) or 
equivalent
Review 
monitoring,
verification,
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only.  An actual plan should specify: (1) in the Critical Limits column: the aquaculture drugs that are reasonably likely to be present and the critical 
limits to be applied to each drug; and (2) in the Verification column:  the aquaculture drugs for which analysis will be conducted, the protocol for sample collection, and the analytical method to 
be used for each drug. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - QUALITY 
ASSURANCE PROGRAM 
Set Critical Limits. 
Certificate indicating that the producer operates 
under a third-party-audited quality assurance 
(QA) program that controls aquaculture drug 
use.  The certificate may accompany each lot of 
incoming aquacultured fish or may be issued for 
each producer of incoming aquacultured fish as a 
continuing certification. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Certificate indicating operation under third­
party-
audited QA program. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual check for presence of a certificate. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received must be checked for the 
presen
ce of certificates.  Certificates may be 
issued on a lot-by-lot (no less than annually) 
or continuing basis. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature o
f the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject the lot; 
OR 
•	 Hold the lo
t until a certificate can be 
provided; 
OR 
•	 Hold and an
alyze the lot for those 
aquaculture drugs that are reasonably likely 
to be present. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
eviden
ce is obtained that the supplier will 
comply with the certification controls. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Third-party certificates; 
AND 
•	 Receivi
ng record showing lots received and 
presence or absence of a certificate. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review the third-party QA program and 
results o
f audits annually; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
202 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
203 
TABLE 11-5
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 5 - QUALITY ASSURANCE PROGRAM
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 5 - Quality Assurance Program.”  This example illustrates how an aquacultured trout
processor can control aquaculture drugs. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving Aquaculture 
drugs 
Certificate 
indicating that
the producer
operates 
under a third­
party-audited 
QA program 
that covers 
aquaculture
drug usage 
Presence of a
third-party 
certificate 
Visual check Each lot Receiving dock 
employee 
Reject the lot 
Discontinue use
until evidence 
is obtained that
the supplier
will comply
with the
certificate 
requirements 
Third- party 
certificate 
Receiving 
record 
Review 
third-party QA 
program and 
results of audits
annually
Review 
monitoring,
verification,
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 6 - CONTROL 
DURING HOLDING 
Set Critical Limits. 
Aquaculture drugs are used on fish only if the 
drugs have been: 
•	 Approved b
y FDA or granted a conditional 
approval by FDA and used in accordance 
with all labeled conditions; 
OR 
•	 Approved b
y FDA and used in an extra-label 
manner under a veterinarian’s supervision in 
accordance with FDA regulations; 
OR 
•	 Put on the FDA l
ist of low regulatory priority 
aquaculture drugs and used according to the 
provisions on the list;  
OR 
•	 Used for use i
n food fish as an INAD subject 
to an investigational new animal drug 
exemption under 21 CFR Part 511 and used 
according to the requirements in the food 
use authorization. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Type of aquaculture drug used; 
AND 
•	 Date and qua
ntity of drug use; 
AND 
•	 Any other conditions of drug usage that are 
relevant to:
  
Established withdrawal times; 
° 
Labeled instructions; ° 
Extra-label use of an FDA-approved drug 
used under a veterinarian’s supervision 
in accordance with FDA regulations and 
guidances; 
° 
Conditions specified in the FDA list 
of low regulatory priority aquaculture 
drugs; 
° 
OR 
Requirements of the INAD food use 
authorization;
 
° 
AND
 
•	 Date of dist
ribution of the finished product. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visually observe drug use and finished 
product
 distribution. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Every time aquaculture drugs are used 
during h
olding or transportation; 
AND 
•	 Every time t
he finished product is 
distributed. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	  Any person who has an understanding of 
the natur
e of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Destroy the product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the p
roduct to non-food use; 
OR 
•	 If the drug is a
pproved for the species in 
which it was used, hold the product until the 
mandatory withdrawal period (if applicable) 
has been met and until the drug residue 
level is below the established tolerance.  
These corrective actions may be verified by 
collecting and analyzing a representative 
sample of the product, using an appropriate 
analytical method. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Modify drug use practices. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
204 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
205 
TABLE 11-6
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 6 - CONTROL DURING HOLDING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 6 - Control During Holding.”  This example illustrates how a processor that holds live
lobster in a lobster pound can control aquaculture drugs. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Aquaculture drugs may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants, pesticides and natural toxins). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Holding Aquaculture 
drug 
oxytetracycline 
Lobster will be
withheld from
distribution for 
30 days after 
treatment with
oxytetracycline 
in accordance
with the labeled
directions for 
use
No other
aquaculture
drugs will be 
used 
Type of
aquaculture
drug used 
Visual 
observation of 
drug use 
Every time 
aquaculture
drugs are used 
Production 
employee 
Hold the product
Collect a sample of 
the finished product 
and analyze for drug 
residues
(oxytetracycline)
Release the product 
if the drug residue 
level is below the 
tolerance (2 ppm)
Hold the product if 
the drug residue level 
exceeds the tolerance 
and retest
Destroy the lot when 
unapproved drugs 
are used
Modify drug use 
practices 
Drug use 
record 
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
Date and
quantity of drug 
use 
Visual 
observation of 
drug use 
Every time 
aquaculture
drugs are used 
Production 
employee 
Drug use 
record 
Date of finished
product 
distribution 
Visual check 
of product 
distribution 
Every time 
finished
product is 
shipped 
Shipping
supervisor 
Shipping
record 
 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Drug use records; 
AND 
•	 Records i
ndicating date of distribution of the 
finished product. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
record
s within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
206 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Federal J
oint Subcommittee on Aquaculture. 
April 2007. Guide to drug, vaccine, and 
pesticide use in aquaculture. http://aquanic. 
org/jsa/wgqaap/drugguide/drugguide.htm. 
•	 Federal R
egister. November 21, 2005. 
Rules and regulations: new animal drugs: 
florfenicol, vol. 70, no 233. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 Federal R
egister. February 6, 2007. Rules and 
regulations: new animal drugs: hydrogen 
peroxide, vol. 72, no. 24. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 Federal R
egister. November 26, 2007. 
Rules and regulations: new animal drugs: 
florfenicol, vol. 72, no. 226. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. February 
19, 2008. Extralabel use of approved 
drugs in aquaculture. In Program policy 
and procedures manual guide 1240.4210. 
Department of Health and Human Services, 
Food and Drug Administration, Center 
for Veterinary Medicine. http://www. 
fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/ 
GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/ 
PoliciesProceduresManual/ucm046932.pdf. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. 
October 23, 2003. Evaluating the safety 
of antimicrobial new animal drugs with 
regard to their microbiological effects 
on bacteria of human health concern. In 
Guidance for industry, no. 152. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Food 
and Drug Administration, Center for 
Veterinary Medicine. http://www.fda.
 
gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/
 
GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/
 
GuidanceforIndustry/ucm052519.pdf.
 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Administration. April 2010. 
Certain other dosage form new animal 
drugs. In Code of Federal Regulations, 21 
CFR 529. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Administration. April 2010. 
Extra label drug use in animals. In Code 
of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 530. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Administration. April 2010. 
Implantation or injectable dosage form 
new animal drugs. In Code of Federal 
Regulations, 21 CFR 522. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Administration. April 2010. 
New animal drug applications. In Code 
of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 514. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. April 
2010. New animal drugs for investigational 
use. In Code of Federal Regulations, 21 
CFR 511. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Administration. April 2010. 
Tolerances for residues of new animal drugs 
in food. In Code of Federal Regulations, 21 
CFR 556. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. April 
26, 2007. Enforcement priorities for drug 
use in aquaculture; part B and part C. 
In CVM’s policy and procedures manual 
1240.4200. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Veterinary Medicine. http://www. 
fda.gov/downloads/AnimalVeterinary/ 
GuidanceComplianceEnforcement/ 
PoliciesProceduresManual/ucm046931.pdf. 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
207 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 11: Aquaculture Drugs 
208
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than 
Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse
 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation  
as a result of time and temperature abuse of fish  
and fishery products can cause consumer illness.  
This hazard is limited to bacterial pathogens since  
viral pathogens (viruses) are not able to grow in  
food. Of particular concern in seafood are the  
pathogenic forms of  Listeria monocytogenes  (L. 
monocytogenes),  Vibrio vulnificus (V. vulnificus),  
Vibrio parahaemolyticus  (V. parahaemolyticus),  
Vibrio cholera (V. cholera), Escherichia coli  (E.  
coli), Salmonella  spp., Shigella spp., Staphylococcus  
aureus  (S. aureus), Clostridium perfringens  
(C. perfringens),  Bacillus cereus  (B. cereus),  
Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni), and Yersinia  
enterocolitica  (Y. enterocolitica). See Appendix 7  
for a description of the public health impacts of  
these pathogens. 
P
athogenic bacteria can enter the process on raw 
materials. They can also be introduced into foods 
during processing from the air, unclean hands, 
insanitary utensils and equipment, contaminated 
water, or sewage and through cross-contamination 
between raw and cooked product. The primary 
method for control is to reduce levels through 
cooking or other treatments, when feasible, 
minimize the potential for recontamination and 
to maintain products at temperatures that do not 
support growth of pathogenic bacteria. 
Time and temperature abuse occurs when a 
product is allowed to remain at temperatures 
favorable to pathogenic bacteria growth for 
sufficient time to result in unsafe levels of 
pathogenic bacteria or their toxins in the product. 
Therefore, management of time and temperature 
of product exposure is important to producing 
a safe product. Table A-1 (Appendix 4) provides 
guidance concerning the conditions under which 
certain pathogenic bacteria can grow. The bacteria 
listed are those of greatest concern in fish and 
fishery products. 
Managing time and temperature of exposure 
Time and temperature management relies 
on identification of time and temperature 
combinations that ensure the safety of your 
product. The following factors should be 
considered: 
•	
 T
he types of pathogenic bacteria that are 
reasonably likely to be present; 
•	
 W
hether those pathogens can grow in the 
food; 
•	
 T
he infective dose of the pathogenic bacteria; 
•	
 T
he expected initial level of the pathogenic 
bacteria in the food. 
Presence of pathogenic bacteria 
It is reasonable to assume that pathogenic bacteria 
of various types that are not associated with 
specific food sources, including those listed in 
Table A-1 (Appendix 4), will be present on raw fish 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and fishery products and non-fishery ingredients.  
They might be present only at low levels or only  
sporadically, but even such occurrences warrant  
consideration because of the potential for growth  
and toxin production under temperature abuse  
conditions. However, certain pathogenic bacteria  
are associated with specific food sources, and it  
may not be necessary to assume that they will be  
present in other foods unless introduced from a  
contaminated source. For example, V. vulnificus, 
V. parahaemolyticus, and V. cholerae non-O1  
and non-O139 are generally associated with  
marine and estuarine species of fish and not with  
freshwater species or non-fishery ingredients. 
Pathogenic bacteria can also be introduced 
during processing, even after cooking. Well-
designed sanitation programs will minimize 
their introduction. However, in most cases, 
it is not reasonable to assume that sanitation 
programs will fully prevent the introduction of 
pathogenic bacteria. For this reason, controls 
should be in place to minimize the risk of 
pathogenic bacteria growth. 
Pathogenic bacteria growth 
Fish and fishery products generally provide 
sufficient nutrients for pathogenic bacteria 
growth. However, chemical and physical 
characteristics of the product and its packaging 
could limit or enhance pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation. Furthermore, 
these characteristics could restrict competing 
microorganism growth and provide conditions 
favorable to pathogenic bacteria growth. 
Consider: 
•	
 T
he moisture available to support pathogenic 
bacteria growth in the product (i.e., water 
activity); 
•	
 T
he amount of salt and preservatives in the 
product (e.g., water phase salt and nitrates); 
•	
 T
he acidity of the product (i.e., pH); 
•	
 T
he availability of oxygen in the product 
(i.e., aerobic or anaerobic conditions); 
•	
 T
he presence of competing spoilage 
organisms in the food. 
Table A-1 (Appendix 4) provides guidance 
on some conditions that limit the growth 
of those pathogenic bacteria that are most 
relevant to fish and fishery products. Table A-1 
provides minimum and maximum values of 
pathogenic bacteria growth. This table can help 
you to decide whether particular pathogenic 
bacteria will grow in your food if it is time and 
temperature-abused. 
Certain pathogenic bacteria grow well in time  
and temperature-abused raw fish and fishery  
products (e.g., raw molluscan shellfish), and  
others do not. Those that grow well in time  
and temperature-abused raw fish include: V.  
vulnificus, V. parahaemolyticus, V. cholerae, and  
L. monocytogenes. Others may grow if the natural  
condition of the raw fish is changed, such as  
through salting or reduced oxygen packaging.  
Those that ordinarily do not grow well, because  
they compete poorly with the normal spoilage  
bacteria, include: C. jejuni, pathogenic strains of  
E. coli, Salmonella  spp.,  Shigella  spp.,  S. aureus, 
C. perfringens, B. cereus, and  Y. enterocolitica. 
Most pathogenic bacteria will grow well in 
temperature-abused cooked fish if their growth is 
not controlled by means such as drying, salting, 
or acidification, because competing bacteria are 
destroyed by the cooking process. 
Infective dose 
The infective dose or toxic dose is the total 
number of a pathogen, or the total amount of a 
toxin, that is necessary to produce human illness. 
The dose often varies considerably for a single 
pathogen based on the health of the consumer 
and the virulence (infective capacity) of the 
particular strain of the pathogen. 
The typical infectious dose is known or  
suspected to be very low (i.e., one to several  
hundred organisms can cause illness) for  
many of the pathogenic bacteria listed in Table  
A-1 (Appendix 4). These include C. jejuni, 
E. coli, Salmonella  spp.,  Shigella  spp., and  Y.  
enterocolitica. The typical infectious dose for  
other pathogenic bacteria is considered to be  
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
210 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
somewhat higher (i.e., several thousand to less  
than 100,000). These include V. vulnificus and  
V. parahaemolyticus. In the case of both of  
these categories of pathogens, it is advisable to  
prevent any significant growth so that the typical  
infective dose is not exceeded. In other words,  
product temperatures should be maintained  
below the minimum growth temperature for the  
pathogen or should not be allowed to exceed  
that temperature for longer than the lag growth  
phase (i.e., the slow growth phase during  
which a pathogenic bacteria acclimates to its  
environment before proceeding to rapid growth)  
of the pathogenic bacteria at the exposure  
temperature. 
Still other pathogenic bacteria require large 
numbers in order to cause disease. The typical 
infectious dose of V. cholerae is suspected to be 
1,000,000 cells. S. aureus and B. cereus toxin do 
not normally produce sufficient toxin to cause 
illness until numbers of the pathogen reach 
100,000 to 1,000,000/gram. 
C. perfringens typically does not produce toxin 
in the human gut unless at least 100,000,000 
bacteria are consumed. Limited growth of these 
pathogens might not compromise the safety of 
the product. However, time and temperature 
controls must be adequate to prevent growth 
before the infectious or toxic dose is reached. 
Levels of pathogenic bacteria 
The levels of a pathogen that are likely to be 
present in a fish or fishery product is dependent 
on factors such as the quality of the harvest 
water, how the raw material was handled 
before it was delivered to your plant, and the 
effectiveness of your sanitation control program. 
As a practical matter, the initial number of low­
to-moderate infectious dose pathogenic bacteria 
in a food is usually of limited importance when 
you develop a time and temperature management 
strategy because these pathogens should be 
controlled by a time and temperature strategy 
that does not permit their growth to pass the 
lag phase. On the other hand, when controlling 
pathogenic bacteria that have a relatively high 
infective dose, the initial number of pathogenic 
bacteria may be a significant consideration. 
Practical considerations for unrefrigerated 
processing 
Consider the above described factors to identify 
the pathogen(s) that presents the greatest 
challenge with respect to managing time and 
temperature exposure in your product. This then 
becomes the target pathogen(s) for time and 
temperature control. Table A-2 (Appendix 4) can 
then be used to establish safe exposure times 
for the target pathogen(s) at the temperatures at 
which you expect your product to be exposed. 
As an alternative, you can use predictive  
microbiology models, such as the U.S.  
Department of Agriculture Pathogen Modeling  
Program (http://ars.usda.gov/Services/docs. 
htm?docid=6786) or ComBase (
http://www. 
combase.cc/default.html) f
or product-specific 
time and temperature exposure calculations. 
However, you should validate the reliability of 
predictions from such models for your food. 
Growth rates of pathogens are highly 
temperature dependent. Ordinarily, pathogenic 
bacteria growth is relatively slow at temperatures 
below 70°F (21.1°C). In most cases, growth is 
very slow below 50°F (10°C), and 40°F (4.4°C) 
is below the minimum growth temperature of 
most pathogenic bacteria, although there are 
some exceptions. On the other hand, pathogenic 
bacteria grow relatively fast at temperatures 
above 70°F (21.1°C). Product temperatures should 
be maintained below the minimum growth 
temperature for the pathogen or should not be 
allowed to exceed that temperature for longer 
than the lag growth phase of the pathogen 
growth cycle. 
Consider the following recommendations when 
developing a product monitoring program. Product 
surface temperature or ambient temperature 
generally should be monitored when the ambient 
temperature (e.g., air) is warmer than the product 
internal temperature. Internal temperature in the 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c
enter of the thickest part of the product should 
be monitored when the ambient temperature 
(e.g., air, ice, and brine) is cooler than the product 
internal temperature. Similarly, when selecting a 
product for temperature measurement, consider 
the location of the product selected in relation to 
the environment and select the likely worse case 
product. For example, a product in the center of 
a pile of products will take longer to cool than a 
product at the surface. 
•	
 Strategies for control of pathogenic bacteria 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery 
products. They include: 
•	
 M
anaging the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogen growth and toxin production 
(covered generally in this chapter; for 
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum), in 
Chapter 13; and for S. aureus in hydrated 
batter mixes, in Chapter 15); 
•	
 K
illing pathogenic bacteria by cooking 
or pasteurization (covered in Chapter 16) 
or by retorting (covered by the Thermally 
Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in 
Hermetically Sealed Containers regulation, 21 
CFR 113 (hereinafter, the Low-Acid Canned 
Foods (LACF) Regulation); 
•	
 K
illing pathogenic bacteria by processes 
that retain the raw product characteristics 
(covered in Chapter 17); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogen growth (water activity) in 
the product by drying (covered in Chapter 14); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogen growth (water activity) 
in the product by formulation (covered in 
Chapter 13); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by Chapter 13 for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration to 
control pathogens from the harvest area 
(covered in Chapter 4). 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether pathogenic bacteria growth 
and toxin formation as a result of time and 
temperature abuse is a significant hazard at a 
processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
pathogenic bacteria will be introduced at this 
processing step (do unsafe levels come in with the 
raw material or will the process introduce them)? 
It is reasonable to assume that pathogenic  
bacteria of various types that are not  
associated with specific food sources,  
including those listed in Table A-1 (Appendix  
4), will be present on raw fish and fishery  
products and non-fishery ingredients.  
However, certain pathogenic bacteria are  
associated with specific food sources, and it  
may not be necessary to assume that they  
will be present in other foods unless they  
have been cross-contaminated. For example,  
V. vulnificus, V. parahaemolyticus, and V.  
cholerae non-O1 and non-O139 are generally  
associated with marine and estuarine species  
of fish and not with freshwater species or  
non-fishery ingredients.  
P
athogenic bacteria also could be introduced 
during processing, even after cooking. Well-
designed sanitation programs (prerequisite 
programs) will minimize the introduction of 
pathogenic bacteria. However, in most cases 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is not reasonable to assume that they will 
fully prevent the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria. Additional information on this 
topic is presented in the previous section, 
“Understand the Potential Hazard.” 
2.	 Is it reasonably likely that pathogenic bacteria 
will grow to unsafe levels and/or produce toxin 
at this processing step? 
In order to answer this question, you must 
first determine which of those pathogenic 
bacteria that are reasonably likely to be 
present in your product would be able 
to grow under time and temperature 
abuse conditions. Information on this 
topic is presented in the previous section, 
“Understand the Potential Hazard.” 
Time and temperature abuse at one step 
alone might not result in an unsafe product. 
However, time and temperature abuse 
that occurs at successive processing steps 
(including storage steps) might be sufficient 
to result in unsafe levels of pathogenic 
bacteria or toxins. For this reason, you should 
consider the cumulative effect of time and 
temperature abuse during the entire process. 
Table A-2 (Appendix 4) provides guidance 
about the kinds of time and temperature 
abuse that might cause a product to be 
unsafe. A study may need to be conducted to 
determine time and temperature exposure of 
your seafood to temperature abuse for each 
process step. 
Remember that you should consider the 
potential for time and temperature abuse in 
the absence of controls. You might already 
have controls in your process that minimize 
the potential for time and temperature 
abuse that could result in unsafe levels of 
pathogenic bacteria or toxins. This section 
and subsequent sections will help you 
determine whether those or other controls 
should be included in your Hazard Analysis 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan. 
In summary, under ordinary circumstances 
(e.g., without data to the contrary), you 
should consider that it is reasonably likely 
that a pathogenic bacteria in Table A-1 
(Appendix 4) will grow to an unsafe level or 
produce toxin in your product at a particular 
processing step if all of the following 
conditions are met: 
•	
 It is reasonably lik
ely to be present; 
•	
 Its gro
wth is not prevented by 
a condition of the food; 
•	
 It is reasonably lik
ely that, in the 
absence of controls, cumulative time 
and temperature abuse conditions 
such as those described in Table A-2 
(Appendix 4) could occur during 
processing of the product, and the 
processing step could contribute 
significantly to that cumulative abuse. 
3.	 Can unsafe levels of pathogenic bacteria and/ 
or toxin production that are reasonably likely to 
occur be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable 
level at this processing step? 
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation due to time and temperature abuse 
should be considered a significant hazard 
at any processing step where a preventive 
measure is, or can be, used to eliminate 
the hazard (or reduce the likelihood of its 
occurrence to an acceptable level) if it is 
reasonably likely to occur. The preventive 
measures that can be applied for pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation due to 
time and temperature abuse include: 
•	
 R
efrigeration of the product and 
controlling refrigeration temperatures; 
•	
 Proper icing of the produc
t; 
•	
 Controlling the amount of time that the 
produc
t is exposed to temperatures 
that would permit pathogenic bacteria 
growth or toxin production; 
•	
 R
apid cooling of the product; 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
213 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Ensuring that incoming fish 
were handled properly during 
refriger
ated transportation from the 
previous processor, including: 
Controlling refrigeration temperatures 
during transit; 
° 
Proper icing during tr
ansit. ° 
•	 Intended use 
Except as noted, it is unlikely that the 
intended use will affect the significance of 
the hazard. 
FDA is not aware of any HACCP controls 
that exist internationally for the control 
of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery 
products that are customarily fully cooked 
by the consumer or end user before 
consumption, other than a rigorous sanitation 
regime as part of a prerequisite program 
or as part of HACCP itself. The Fish and 
Fishery Products regulation, 21 CFR 123 
(called the Seafood HACCP Regulation in 
this guidance document) requires such a 
regime. The proper application of sanitation 
controls is essential because of the likelihood 
that pathogenic bacteria can be introduced 
into fish and fishery products through 
poor handling practices by the aquaculture 
producer, the fisherman, or the processor. 
FDA is interested in information regarding any 
HACCP controls beyond sanitation that could 
be necessary and practical for the control 
of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery 
products that are customarily fully cooked 
by the consumer or end user. However, the 
agency makes no recommendations in this 
guidance document and has no specific 
expectations with regard to such controls 
in processors’ HACCP plans. The agency 
plans to develop Good Manufacturing 
Practice guidelines for harvest vessels and 
for aquaculture in an effort to minimize the 
likelihood that these operations will contribute 
pathogens to fish and fishery products. 
Some products are partially cooked by 
the processor for culinary purposes (e.g., 
setting the batter or breading, or stabilizing 
the product shape), and are customarily 
fully cooked by the consumer or end user. 
Examples include: fish balls, shrimp egg rolls, 
shrimp and cheese stuffed ravioli, crab cakes, 
and breaded fish portions. Although the 
exterior of these products may appear cooked, 
the interior fish protein is not coagulated, and 
the products are not ready-to-eat. 
Other products contain a combination of 
raw or partially cooked, and fully cooked 
ingredients (e.g., seafood mixture of raw 
oysters, cooked shrimp, and raw or cooked 
octopus). Although the protein of some of 
the fishery ingredients is coagulated, some is 
not. As a result, many of these products are 
not ready-to-eat. However, these combination 
products should be considered ready-to-eat 
if the raw or partially cooked ingredients are 
customarily eaten without cooking by the 
consumer or end user. 
Note that the toxin produced by S. aureus 
is not destroyed by cooking or retorting. Its 
formation should, therefore, be prevented 
in all fish and fishery products. However, as 
previously mentioned, S. aureus does not 
grow well in raw fish, unless the growth of 
competing spoilage organisms is inhibited (e.g., 
by salting or vacuum packaging). B. cereus also 
produces a heat-stable toxin and forms heat-
resistant spores that can survive cooking. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of 
time and temperature abuse: 
1.	 If there is a cook step, pasteurization step, or 
retorting step later in your manufacturing process, 
you should, in most cases, identify that step as 
the CCP. You would not usually need to identify 
processing steps prior to cooking, pasteurization, 
or retorting as CCPs for this hazard. 
Example: 
A cooked shrimp processor should set 
the critical control point for pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as 
a result of time and temperature abuse 
at the cook step. The processor would not 
need to identify each of the processing 
steps prior to cooking as CCPs. 
Guidance for this pathogen control strategy 
is contained in Chapter 16 (for cooking and 
pasteurization) and the LACF Regulation, 21 
CFR 113 (for retorting). 
However, there are two important limitations 
to this strategy: 
•	
 The cooking,
 pasteurizing, or retorting 
process must be sufficient to eliminate 
the most resistant pathogenic bacteria 
of public health concern that are 
reasonably likely to be present; 
•	
 Cer
tain toxins (e.g., S. aureus and B. 
cereus toxins) are heat stable. Heat 
treatment, including retorting, might not 
eliminate the toxin once it is formed. 
In either case, time and temperature control 
would be necessary at the processing steps 
at which growth and toxin formation could 
occur. 
2.	 If there is no cook step, pasteurization step, or 
retorting step later in the process, you should 
identify as a CCP each processing step at which 
you have identified this hazard as significant. You 
should control cumulative exposure of the product 
to time and temperatures that will permit growth 
or toxin formation at these steps. 
Example: 
A crabmeat processor identifies a series 
of post-cook processing and storage 
steps (e.g., backing, picking, packing, 
and refrigerated storage) as presenting 
a reasonable likelihood of pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation. 
The processor does not subject the product 
to a final pasteurization process and 
recognizes that it might be consumed 
without further cooking. The processor 
controls the temperature during 
refrigerated storage and the time of 
exposure to unrefrigerated conditions 
during the processing steps. The processor 
should identify each of the post-cook 
processing and storage steps as CCPs for 
this hazard. 
This chapter provides the following four 
control approaches, or control strategies, each 
relating to a separate potential CCP or a set 
of CCPs: 
•	
 “Control Str
ategy Example 1 - Transit 
Control.” This control strategy should 
be applied to the control of transit at 
receipt of chilled (i.e., refrigerated, 
iced, or held under chemical cooling 
media, such as gel packs, and not 
frozen) ready-to-eat fishery products; 
•	
 “Control Str
ategy Example 2 - 
Refrigerated Storage and Refrigerated 
Processing Control.” This control 
strategy should be applied to chilled 
(i.e., refrigerated, iced, and not 
frozen) storage and refrigerated 
(i.e., <40ºF (4.4ºC)) processing; 
•	
 “Control Str
ategy Example 3 - Cooling 
After Cooking Control.” This control 
strategy should be applied to a cooling 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
step when there is no significant 
handling during the cooling and 
there is a need to control spore-
forming pathogenic bacteria; 
•	
 “Control Str
ategy Example 4 - 
Unrefrigerated Processing Control.” 
This control strategy should be 
applied to unrefrigerated (i.e., 
≥40ºF (4.4ºC)) processing. 
Following is further guidance that may help 
you determine whether these processing 
steps should be identified as CCPs for this 
hazard. The guidance is divided into two 
types of finished products: cooked ready-to­
eat and raw ready-to-eat. 
•	
 Cooked, ready-to-eat products 
These products may be cooked by the 
processor, received by the processor already 
cooked, or assembled by the processor from 
ready-to-eat components. They may appear 
to the consumer or end user to be ready-to­
eat products and may, therefore, be eaten 
without further cooking. Examples include: 
cooked crabmeat, lobster meat, and crayfish 
meat; surimi-based analog products; seafood 
salads; and hot-smoked fish. Note that 
smoked fish is also covered in Chapter 13, 
and cooking and pasteurization are covered 
in Chapter 16. 
Cooked, ready-to-eat products, especially 
assembled products, might develop pathogen 
hazards as a result of cross-contamination 
and growth. Contributing factors to this 
risk are manual handling steps, multiple 
ingredients, unrefrigerated processing, and 
multiple cooling steps. Cumulative exposure 
to time and temperature abuse after the 
cook step should be taken into consideration 
when establishing CCPs based on time and 
temperature. 
In some cases, refrigerated cooked, ready-
to-eat foods (e.g., lobster meat, pasteurized 
crabmeat, smoked fish, and surimi-based 
analog products) are received by a secondary 
processor and held for sale without further 
handling. In other cases, these products 
are received by a secondary processor and 
used as ingredients in a ready-to-eat product 
that will not be cooked or pasteurized by 
that processor (e.g., seafood salad). In these 
cases, the receiving and storage steps by the 
secondary processor should be designated 
as CCPs to control the hazard of pathogenic 
bacteria growth. On the other hand, if 
these ready-to-eat foods are received by the 
secondary processor to be used in a product 
that will be cooked or pasteurized by that 
processor, the receiving and storage steps 
before the cooking or pasteurization step 
might not need to be designated as CCPs, 
unless S. aureus or B. cereus toxin formation 
is a significant hazard. Remember that these 
toxins are not likely to be inactivated by heat. 
In still other cases, ready-to-eat foods are 
received by a secondary processor and 
used as ingredients in a non-ready-to-eat 
product (e.g., cooked octopus used by the 
processor as an ingredient in a seafood mix 
that is customarily eaten after cooking by the 
consumer or end user). Again, the receiving 
and storage steps might not need to be 
designated as CCPs, unless S. aureus or B. 
cereus toxin formation is a significant hazard. 
The need to establish a CCP at cooling after 
cooking or pasteurization depends on: 
•	
 The se
verity of the cooking (including 
hot smoking) or pasteurization step; 
•	
 The e
xtent to which the product 
is handled between the end of the 
cooking or pasteurization step and 
the end of the cooling step. 
Spore-forming pathogenic bacteria may 
survive cooking or pasteurization processes 
that target vegetative pathogenic bacteria. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
216 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For example, in foods that contain meat or 
rice, spores of C. perfringens and B. cereus 
could be present, could survive the cooking 
process, and could grow and produce toxin 
in the product during cooling and subsequent 
handling. In fact, the heat from the cooking 
process might initiate growth of the surviving 
spores. In this case, a CCP may be needed 
at product cooling. However, some cooking 
processes might be adequate to kill even the 
spores of C. perfringens and B. cereus. In this 
case, a CCP at product cooling may not be 
necessary. 
When significant handling occurs after 
cooking or pasteurization, there is a risk 
that the product might be recontaminated 
with pathogenic bacteria. Because many of 
the normally occurring spoilage organisms 
may have been eliminated by the cooking 
or pasteurization process and are no longer 
present to compete with the pathogenic 
bacteria, rapid growth and toxin formation 
by the pathogenic bacteria are possible. It 
is advisable to fully cool a product before 
it is further handled, in order to minimize 
pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation. When significant handling occurs 
after the heating process but before the 
completion of the cooling process or when 
the cooked product comes into contact with 
equipment that was not heated along with 
the product, time and temperature exposure 
controls may need to start at that point. In 
some processes, cooling is performed (1) 
before any significant handling of the cooked 
product; and (2) in the same container 
in which the product was cooked. Under 
these conditions, cooling after cooking may 
not need to be identified as a CCP for this 
hazard. However, such a determination is 
dependent upon strict adherence to good 
sanitation practices to further minimize the 
risk of recontamination with pathogenic 
bacteria. 
Time and temperature controls may be 
needed at the following steps (CCPs): 
•	
 R
eceiving; 
•	
 Tha
wing; 
•	
 Cooling af
ter cooking; 
•	
 Processing af
ter cooking: 
Slicing hot-smoked salmon; ° 
Mixing seafood salad; ° 
Picking crabmeat; ° 
•	 P ackaging; 
•	
 In-process and finished produc
t 
refrigerated (not frozen) storage. 
Time and temperature controls will usually 
not be needed at processing steps that meet 
the following conditions: 
•	
 Continuous, mechanical 
processing steps that are brief: 
Mechanical size gr
ading of cooked ° 
shrimp; 
Mechanical forming of surimi-based 
° 
analog products; 
Individual quick freezing;
° 
•	 Processing steps that are brief and 
unlik
ely to contribute significantly to 
the cumulative time and temperature 
exposure to unrefrigerated conditions: 
Date code stamping;
° 
Case packing;° 
•	 Processing steps where the product 
is held in a frozen state:
 
Glazing;
° 
Assembly of orders for distribution; ° 
Frozen product storage; ° 
•	 Processing steps where the 
produc
t is held at temperatures 
above 135°F (57.2°C): 
Initial stage of cooling;° 
Hot holding.° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
217
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	
 Raw, ready-to-eat products 
These products are not heated during 
processing to a temperature that destroys 
pathogenic bacteria. They are often 
consumed without cooking. Examples 
include: cold-smoked fish, raw oysters, 
clams and mussels, and raw finfish (when 
the processor has knowledge or has reason 
to know that the product will be consumed 
without a process sufficient to kill pathogens 
of public health concern or where the 
processor represents, labels, or intends for 
the product to be so consumed). 
Like cooked, ready-to-eat products, raw  
ready-to-eat products may contain pathogenic  
bacteria as a result of near-shore harvest  
water contamination, poor aquaculture  
practices, or poor sanitary practices during  
harvesting, transportation, or processing.  
For example, oysters, especially those  
harvested during the warm weather  
months, might contain  V. vulnificus or  
V. parahaemolyticus. Raw finfish might  
contain V. parahaemolyticus, Salmonella  
spp.,  or  L. monocytogenes.  Some of these  
pathogenic bacteria (e.g., V. vulnificus,  V.  
parahaemolyticus, and L. monocytogenes) are  
capable of growth in raw fish. 
Time and temperature controls may be needed 
at the following processing steps (CCPs): 
•	
 R
eceiving; 
•	
 Processing: 
Thawing;
 ° 
Shucking;° 
Portioning; ° 
•	 P ackaging; 
•	
 R
aw material, in-process product,
 
and finished product refrigerated 
(not frozen) storage.
 
Time and temperature controls will usually 
not be needed at processing steps that meet 
the following conditions: 
•	
 Continuous, mechanical 
processing steps that are brief: 
Mechanical filleting;
° 
•	 Processing steps that are brief and 
unlik
ely to contribute significantly to 
the cumulative time and temperature 
exposure to unrefrigerated conditions: 
Date code stamping;
° 
Case packing;° 
•	 Processing steps where the product 
is held in a frozen state: 
Assembly of orders f
or distribution; ° 
Frozen storage. ° 
•	 Time and temperature profile 
Preparing a diagram that depicts the 
maximum times and temperatures at which 
your product will be exposed at each 
processing step may help you determine 
cumulative product exposure, especially if 
your product is cooked, ready-to-eat. This 
diagram can help you identify CCPs, as 
well as critical limits, as will be discussed 
later. Figures 12-1 and 12-2 are examples 
of time and temperature profiles for two 
different crabmeat processes. Although the 
figures show similar time and temperature 
profiles, they demonstrate how differences in 
processing operations, especially with respect 
to when significant handling occurs, can have 
an impact on the location of CCPs and on the 
critical limits at those CCPs. 
Figure 12-1 shows a time and temperature 
profile for a cooked crabmeat processor that 
significantly handles product before it is 
cooled to 50°F (10°C). As a result, a CCP is 
likely to be needed at backing, picking, and 
packing. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
218 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12-2 shows a time and temperature 
profile for a cooked crabmeat processor that 
does not significantly handle product before 
it is cooled to 50°F (10°C). As a result, a CCP 
is not needed until the picking operation, 
which is the first point at which significant 
handling occurs. A more restrictive set of 
critical limits is also likely for the product 
depicted by Figure 12-1 than for that depicted 
by Figure 12-2, because the former product is 
handled while still warm. 
FIGURE 12-1: Internal Temperature Proﬁle — Blue Crabmeat Processing
 
Partial Cooling Only After Cook With Signiﬁcant Handling Before Full Cooling
 
135˚F (57.2˚C) 
Backing Begins 
Place in Cooler Picking Begins Packing Ends 
80˚F (26.7˚C) 
70˚F (21.1˚C) 
50˚F (10˚C) 
40˚F (4.4˚C) 
1 HR. 2 HOURS 
MAX. MAX. 
1 HR. 
MAX. 
FIGURE 12-2: Internal Temperature Proﬁle — Blue Crabmeat Processing
 
Cooling After Cook in Original Container With No Signiﬁcant Handling During Cooling
 
135˚F (57.2˚C) 
Cooling in Original Container 
No Signiﬁcant Handling 
Picking Begins Packing End s 
80˚F (26.7˚C) 
70˚F (21.1˚C) 
50˚F (10˚C) 
40˚F (4.4˚C) 
5 HOURS 
MAX. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
219 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides examples of four 
control strategies for pathogenic bacteria growth 
and toxin formation. It may be necessary to select 
more than one control strategy in order to fully 
control the hazard, depending upon the nature of 
your operation. You may select a control strategy 
that is different from those which are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Transit control 
Refrigerated storage and 
refrigerated 
processing control 
 
Cooling after cooking 
control 
 
Unrefrigerated processing 
control 
 
•	
 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - TRANSIT 
CONTROL (FOR REFRIGERATED (NOT FROZEN) 
COOKED, READY-TO-EAT OR RAW, READY-TO­
EAT FISHERY PRODUCTS TO BE STORED OR 
PROCESSED WITHOUT FURTHER COOKING) 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 For fish or fishery products delivered 
refrigerated (not frozen): 
All lots received are accompanied by 
transportation records that show that the 
product was held at or below an ambient 
or internal temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) 
throughout transit. Note that allowance 
for routine refrigeration defrost cycles 
may be necessary; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or products delivered under ice: 
Product is completely surrounded by ice 
at the time of delivery; 
° 
OR
 
•	
 For products delivered under chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs: 
There is an adequate quantity of cooling
media that remain frozen to have 
maintained the product at an internal 
temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) or below 
throughout transit; 
° 
AND 
The internal temperature of the product 
at the time of delivery is 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time (including all 
time outside a controlled temperature 
environment) of 4 hours or less (optional 
control strategy): 
Time of transit does not exceed 4 hours; 
° 
AND 
Internal temperature of the product at 
the time of delivery does not exceed 
40°F (4.4°C). 
° 
Note: Processors receiving product with transit times of 4 hours or 
less may elect to use one of the controls described for longer transit 
times instead. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen):  
The internal temperature of the product 
throughout transportation; 
° 
OR 
The ambient temperature within the 
truck or other carrier throughout 
transportation; 
° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
220 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR	 OR
 
•	
 F
or products delivered under ice: 
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
product at the time of delivery;
 
° 
OR
 
•	
 For products held under chemical cooling 
media, such as gel packs: 
The quantity and frozen status of cooling 
media at the time of delivery; 
° 
AND 
The internal temperature of a 
representative number of product units at 
time of delivery; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time of 4 hours or less: 
The date and time product was 
removed from a controlled temperature 
environment before shipment and the 
date and time delivered; 
° 
AND 
The internal temperature of a 
representative number of product 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) at the 
time of delivery. 
° 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen):  
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
for internal product temperature or 
ambient air temperature monitoring 
during transit; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or products delivered under ice: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice in a representative 
number of containers (e.g., cartons and 
totes) from throughout the shipment at 
delivery; 
° 
•	
 For products delivered under chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy and frozen state of the cooling 
media in a representative number of 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) from 
throughout the shipment at delivery;
 
° 
AND
 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,
  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representative 
number of product containers from 
throughout the shipment at delivery; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time of 4 hours or less: 
Review carrier records to determine the 
date and time product was removed from 
a controlled temperature environment 
before shipment and the date and time 
delivered;
 
° 
AND
 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,
  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representative 
number of product containers (e.g.,  
cartons and totes) randomly selected 
from throughout the shipment, at 
delivery. Measure a minimum of 12 
product containers, unless there are 
fewer than 12 products in a lot, in which 
case measure all of the containers. Lots 
that show a high level of temperature 
variability may require a larger sample 
size. 
° 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 E very lot received. 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 F or continuous temperature-recording 
devices: 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
221 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.  The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 C hill and hold the affected product until an 
evaluation of the total time and temperature 
exposure is performed (a product with 
cumulative exposures that exceed the critical 
limits recommended in “Control Strategy 
Example 4 - Processing Controls” should be 
cooked or diverted to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
crabmeat to a stuffed flounder operation), 
after giving consideration to the fact that 
any S. aureus or B. cereus toxin that may be 
present may not be inactivated by heat, or 
destroyed or diverted to a non-food use); 
OR 
•	
 C
ook the product, after giving consideration 
to the fact that any S. aureus or B. cereus 
toxin that may be present may not be 
inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
crabmeat to a stuffed flounder operation), 
after giving consideration to the fact that 
any S. aureus or B. cereus toxin that may be 
present may not be inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 R
eject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 D iscontinue use of the supplier or carrier 
until evidence is obtained that the identified 
transportation- handling practices have been 
improved. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 R eceiving records showing: 
The results of continuous temperature 
monitoring, including: 
° 
•	
 Printouts,
 charts, or readings from 
temperature-recording devices; 
AND 
•	
 V
isual check of recorded data;
 
OR
 
The results of ice checks, including:
 ° 
•	 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) examined and 
the sufficiency of ice for each; 
AND 
•	
 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) in the lot; 
OR
 
The results of chemical media checks,
 
including: 
° 
•	
 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) examined and the 
frozen status of the media for each; 
AND 
•	
 The number of units in the lot; 
AND/OR 
The results of internal product 
temperature monitoring, including: 
° 
•	
 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) examined 
and the internal temperatures 
observed for each; 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
222 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
•	
 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) in the lot; 
AND 
•	
 Date and time produc
t was 
initially removed from a controlled 
temperature environment and 
date and time product was 
delivered, when applicable. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 B efore a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected. 
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on 
the device to the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a 
thermometer traceable to standards of 
the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST)) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
° 
AND 
•	
 O
nce in service, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the beginning of 
operations. Less frequent accuracy checks may 
be appropriate if they are recommended by 
the instrument manufacturer and if the history 
of use of the instrument in your facility has 
shown that the instrument consistently remains 
accurate for a longer period of time. In addition 
to checking that the device is accurate by one 
of the methods described above, this process 
should include a visual examination of the 
sensor and any attached wires for damage or 
kinks. The device should be checked to ensure 
that it is operational; 
AND 
•	
 C
alibrate the temperature-indicating device 
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer. 
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent 
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device. 
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device). Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	
 C
heck the accuracy of temperature-recording 
devices that are used for monitoring transit 
conditions upon receipt of each lot. The 
accuracy of the device can be checked 
by comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g., air 
temperature) within the temperature range at 
which it will be used; 
AND 
•	
 W
hen visual checks of ice or cooling media 
are used, periodically measure internal 
temperatures of fish to ensure that the ice 
or cooling media are sufficient to maintain 
product temperatures at 40°F (4.4°C) or less; 
AND 
•	
 R
eview monitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
223 
 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
224 
TABLE 12-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - TRANSIT CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Transit Control.” This example illustrates how a processor receiving pasteurized 
crabmeat can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of time and temperature abuse during transit. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. It 
may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogen survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receiving 
pasteurized
crabmeat 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
All lots received 
are
accompanied
by truck 
records that
show 
temperature 
was maintained 
at or below 
40°F 
Temperature 
of truck 
refrigerated 
compartment 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
review and 
evaluation of 
temperature 
monitoring
records for each 
shipment 
Receiving 
employee 
Reject the 
shipment
Discontinue use
of the
supplier or
carrier until 
evidence is 
obtained that
the identifi ed 
transportation- 
handling
practices have 
been improved 
Data
logger printout 
Check
accuracy of the 
temperature 
data logger
upon
receipt of each
lot
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATED 
STORAGE AND REFRIGERATED PROCESSING 
CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 F or refrigerated (not frozen) storage or 
processing of the raw material, in-process 
product, or finished product: 
The product is held at a cooler ambient 
air temperature of 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below. Note that allowance for routine 
refrigeration defrost cycles may be 
necessary. On the other hand, minor 
variations in cooler temperature 
measurements can be avoided 
by submerging the sensor for the 
temperature-recording device (e.g., a 
recording thermometer) in a liquid that 
mimics the characteristics of the product.  
Also note that critical limits during 
refrigerated storage and refrigerated 
processing that specify a cumulative 
time and temperature of exposure to 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) are not 
ordinarily suitable to control the hazard 
because of the difficulty in tracking 
the specific products and the specific 
cumulative temperature exposures 
that those products experience.  The 
cumulative exposure for each product 
would need to be determined prior to 
shipping. If you chose this approach,  
the critical limit for cumulative exposure 
to temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C) 
should include time during transit,  
refrigerated storage, and refrigerated and 
unrefrigerated processing; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For raw material, in-process product, or 
finished product stored under ice: 
The product is completely and 
continuously surrounded by ice 
throughout the storage time. 
° 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 F or refrigerated storage or processing: 
The ambient air temperature of the 
cooler or refrigerated processing room; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or storage under ice: 
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
product. 
° 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 F or refrigerated storage or processing: 
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or storage under ice: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice in a representative 
number of containers (e.g., cartons and 
totes) from throughout the cooler. 
° 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For continuous temperature recording  
devices:  
Continuous monitoring by the device 
itself, with a visual check of the recorded 
data at least once per day; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or storage under ice: 
Sufficient frequency to ensure the critical 
limit is met. 
° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
225 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.  The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
° 
OR 
•	
 F
or other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 C hill and hold the affected product 
until an evaluation of the total time and 
temperature exposure is performed. A 
product with cumulative exposures that 
exceed the critical limits recommended in 
“Control Strategy Example 4 - Unrefrigerated 
Processing Controls,” should be cooked or 
diverted to a use in which the critical limit 
is not applicable (e.g., divert crabmeat to 
a stuffed flounder operation), after giving 
consideration to the fact that any S. aureus 
or B. cereus toxin that may be present may 
not be inactivated by heat, or destroyed or 
diverted to a non-food use; 
OR 
•	
 C
ook the product, after giving consideration 
to the fact that any S. aureus or B. cereus 
toxin that may be present may not be 
inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
crabmeat to a stuffed flounder operation), 
after giving consideration to the fact that 
any S. aureus or B. cereus toxin that may be 
present may not be inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
estroy the product; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 P revent further deterioration of the product: 
Add ice to the product; ° 
OR 
Move some or all of the product in the 
malfunctioning cooler to another cooler;
 
° 
OR
 
Freeze the produc
t;
 ° 
AND 
•	
 A
ddress the root cause: 
Make repairs or adjustments to the 
malfunctioning cooler; 
° 
OR 
Make adjustments to the ice application 
operations. 
° 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 F or refrigerated storage: 
Printouts, charts, or readings from  
continuous temperature-recording devices;
 
° 
AND
 
R
ecord of visual checks of recorded data;
 ° 
OR 
•	
 F
or storage under ice: 
The results of ice checks:° 
•	 The number of containers (e.g., 
car
tons and totes) examined and 
the sufficiency of ice for each; 
AND 
•	
 The appro
ximate number 
of containers (e.g., cartons 
and totes) in the cooler. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
226 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 B efore a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a recording thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify 
that the factory calibration has not been 
affected. This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading 
on the device with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a NIST-traceable thermometer) under 
conditions that are similar to how it will 
be used (e.g., air temperature) within 
the temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
° 
AND 
•	
 O
nce in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations. Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time. In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks. The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	
 C
alibrate the temperature-recording device 
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer. 
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent 
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device. 
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device). Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	
 W
hen visual checks of ice are used, 
periodically measure internal temperatures 
of fish to ensure that the ice is sufficient to 
maintain product temperatures at 40°F (4°C) 
or less; 
AND 
•	
 R
eview monitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
227 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
228 
TABLE 12-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATED STORAGE 
AND REFRIGERATED PROCESSING CONTROL
(ICING MODEL)
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigerated Storage and Refrigerated Processing Control (Icing Model).” This 
example illustrates how a blue crabmeat processor can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of time and temperature abuse during icing. It is 
provided for illustrative purposes only. It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogen survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Finished
product cooler 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Finished
product 
containers
completely
surrounded 
with ice 
Adequacy of ice Visual 
observation 
Each case
immediately
before 
shipping 
Production 
employee 
Re-ice the 
product
Hold and
evaluate 
based on
total time and
temperature 
exposure 
Ice storage 
record 
Check internal 
temperature of 
iced crabmeat 
weekly
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
229 
TABLE 12-3
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATED STORAGE 
AND REFRIGERATED PROCESSING CONTROL
(REFRIGERATION MODEL)
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigerated Storage and Refrigerated Processing Control (Refrigeration Model).” 
This example illustrates how a blue crabmeat processor can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of time and temperature abuse during 
refrigerated storage. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.
 Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogen survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Finished
product cooler 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Cooler
maintained
at or below 
40°F 
Cooler
temperature 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Production 
employee 
Move to 
alternate cooler 
and/or add ice
Hold and
evaluate based 
on total time
and
temperature 
exposure 
Data
logger printout
Record or visual 
checks 
Check the
data logger for 
accuracy and 
damage and to
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	
 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - COOLING 
AFTER COOKING CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, 
depending upon the nature of your operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 T he product is cooled from 135°F (57.2°C) to 
70°F (21.1°C) within 2 hours; 
AND 
•	
 T
he product is further cooled from 135°F 
(57.2°C) to 40°F (4.4°C) within an additional 
4 hours; 
OR 
•	
 T
he minimum or maximum values for the 
critical factors of the process that affect the 
rate of cooling, as established by a cooling 
rate study (e.g., product internal temperature 
at the start of cooling, cooler temperature, 
quantity of ice, quantity or size of the 
product being cooled, product formulation, 
configuration of the product in the cooler). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 T he length of the cooling cycle and the 
internal temperature of the product; 
OR 
•	
 T
he critical factors of the process that affect 
the rate of cooling, as established by a 
cooling rate study. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 C lock; 
AND 
•	
 U
se a temperature-indicating device (e.g., a 
thermometer) and visual check on time of 
cooling; 
OR 
•	
 U
se a continuous temperature-recording device 
(e.g., time and temperature data logger); 
OR 
•	
 U
se appropriate instruments (e.g., a 
temperature-indicating device, such as a 
thermometer, a continuous temperature-
recording device, such as a time and 
temperature data logger, a scale) and/or 
visual observations as necessary to measure 
the critical factors of the process that affect 
the rate of cooling, as established by a 
cooling rate study. 
Example: 
A crayfish processor identifies cooling 
after the cook step as a CCP for 
pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation. The processor establishes a 
cooling critical limit of no more than 
2 hours from 135°F (57.2°C) to 70°F 
(21.1°C) and no more than 4 more 
hours from 70°F (21.1°C) to 40°F 
(4.4°C). The processor uses marked 
batches of cooked product to monitor 
the cooling process. The time that the 
marked batch is removed from the 
cooker is monitored visually, and the 
internal temperature of the product in 
that batch 2 hours after cooking and 4 
more hours after cooking is monitored 
with a dial thermometer. 
Example: 
Another crayfish processor has similarly 
identified cooling after cooking as 
a CCP and has established the same 
critical limit. The processor uses a 
digital time and temperature data logger 
to monitor the cooling rate of the cooked 
product. 
Example: 
Another crayfish processor has similarly 
identified cooling after cooking as a CCP . 
This processor has performed a cooling 
rate study that determined that a cooling 
rate of no more than 2 hours from 135°F 
(57.2°C) to 70°F (21.1°C) and no more 
than 4 more hours from 70°F (21.1°C) to 
40°F (4.4°C) can be achieved as long as 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
230 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certain conditions are met in the cooling 
process. The study determined that the 
following critical limits must be met: 
a cooler temperature of no more than 
60°F (15.6°C) during the first 2 hours of 
cooling and no more than 40°F (4.4°C) 
during the remainder of cooling; and 
no more than 1,000 pounds of crayfish 
in the cooler. The processor monitors 
the cooler temperature with a recording 
thermometer and monitors the weight of 
the product at receiving with a scale. 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 F or temperature-indicating devices: 
At least every 2 hours; ° 
OR 
•	
 For temperature-recording devices:  
At least every 2 hours a device is placed 
in the product. It provides continuous 
monitoring, which is visually checked at 
the end of the cooling period; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For critical aspects of the cooling process: 
As often as necessary to ensure control 
of the process. 
° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For temperature-recording devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.  The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 R ecook the product, after giving 
consideration to the fact that any S. aureus 
toxin that may be present may not be 
inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
crabmeat to a stuffed flounder operation), 
after giving consideration to the fact that any 
B. cereus toxin that may be present may not 
be inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
estroy the product; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 P revent further deterioration of the product: 
Add ice to the product; ° 
AND 
•	
 Address the root cause: 
Make repairs or adjustments to the 
malfunctioning cooler;
 
° 
OR
 
•	
 M
ake adjustments to the ice application 
operation. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 F or temperature-indicating devices: 
Cooling records showing the internal 
temperature of the product, and the 
length of time between the end of the 
cooking (or the time that the product 
internal temperature falls below 
135°F (57.2°C)), and the time that the 
measurement was made; 
° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
•	
 F
or temperature-recording devices: 
° Record of continuous temperature 
monitoring; 
AND 
° Record of visual checks of recorded data; 
OR 
•	
 F
or the critical factors of the process that 
affect the rate of cooling, as established by a 
cooling rate study: 
Appropriate records (e.g., processing 
record showing the results of the time 
and temperature checks and/or volume 
of product in cooler).  
° 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 B efore a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature- recording 
device (e.g., a time and temperature data 
logger) is put into service, check the 
accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected. 
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
° 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point. Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
° 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions 
that are similar to how it will be used 
° 
(e.g.,
 product internal temperature) 
within the temperature range at which it 
will be used; 
AND 
•	
 O
nce in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations. Less frequent accuracy checks may 
be appropriate if they are recommended by 
the instrument manufacturer and the history 
of use of the instrument in your facility has 
shown that the instrument consistently remains 
accurate for a longer period of time. In addition 
to checking that the device is accurate by one 
of the methods described above, this process 
should include a visual examination of the 
sensor and any attached wires for damage or 
kinks. The device should be checked to ensure 
that it is operational; 
AND 
•	
 C
alibrate the temperature-indicating device 
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer. Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions 
of use of the device. Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration or 
the need to replace the device (perhaps with 
a more durable device). Devices subjected to 
high temperatures for extended periods of 
time may require more frequent calibration. 
Calibration should be performed at a 
minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	  R eview monitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
232 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
233 
TABLE 12-4
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - COOLING AFTER COOKING CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3 - Cooling After Cooking Control.” This example illustrates how a dungeness 
crabmeat processor can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of time and temperature abuse during cooling after cooking. In this case, the 
product is fully cooled, i.e., to 40°F (4.4°C), after cooking before significant handling. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogen survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Cooked crab 
cooler 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Crabs cooled 
from 135°F to
70°F in 2 hours
and 70°F to
40°F in 4 more
hours 
Length of 
cooling cycle 
Clock Start marked 
batch
Approximately 
every 2 hours 
during cooking 
Production 
supervisor 
Destroy product
Make 
adjustment
or repairs to
cooler 
Production 
record 
Check the dial
thermometer 
for accuracy 
and damage
and to ensure
that it is
operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Cooked 
crab internal 
temperature 
Dial
thermometer in 
marked batches 
of cooked crabs
Note: Control during unrefrigerated processing is covered under “Control Strategy Example 4 - Unrefrigerated Processing Control.”
Note: Control is necessary at this step because the processor has not established that the cook step is adequate to kill the spores of C. perfringens or B. cereus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	
 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - 
UNREFRIGERATED PROCESSING CONTROL 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
The following recommended critical limits are 
intended to keep the pathogenic bacteria of 
greatest concern in fish and fishery products 
from reaching the rapid growth phase (i.e., 
keep them in the lag phase) as a result of time 
and temperature exposure during processing. 
You may also wish to reference Table A-2 
(Appendix 4), which provides cumulative time 
and temperature combinations for the pathogenic 
bacteria individually. 
For raw, ready-to-eat products: 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 1: 
If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 70°F 
(21.1°C), exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be 
limited to 2 hours (3 hours if S. aureus is 
the only pathogen of concern), 
° 
OR 
Alternatively, exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be 
limited to 4 hours, as long as no more 
than 2 of those hours are between 70°F 
(21.1°C) and 135ºF (57.2ºC); 
° 
OR 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 2: 
If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but never above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure 
time at internal temperatures above 50°F 
(10°C) should be limited to 5 hours (12 
hours if S. aureus is the only pathogen of 
concern); 
° 
OR 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 3: 
The product is held at internal 
temperatures below 50°F (10°C) 
throughout processing,
 
° 
OR
 
Alternatively, the product is held at 
ambient air temperatures below 50°F 
(10°C) throughout processing. 
° 
F
or cooked, ready-to-eat products: 
Note: The critical limits for cooked, ready-to-eat products are 
intended to begin at the completion of cooling or at the time that the 
product is first significantly handled after cooking, whichever occurs 
first. 
•	 CRITICAL LIMIT 1: 
If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 80°F 
(26.7°C), exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be 
limited to 1 hour (3 hours if S. aureus is 
the only pathogen of concern), 
° 
OR 
Alternatively, if at any time the product 
is held at internal temperatures above 
80°F (26.7°C), exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be 
limited to 4 hours, as long as no more 
than 1 of those hours is above 70°F 
(21.1°C); 
° 
OR 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 2: 
If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 70°F 
(21.1°C) but never above 80°F (26.7°C),  
exposure time at internal temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C) should be limited to 
2 hours (3 hours if S. aureus is the only 
pathogen of concern), 
° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
234 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
Alternatively, if the product is never 
held at internal temperatures above 
80°F (26.7°C), exposure times at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) should 
be limited to 4 hours, as long as no more 
than 2 of those hours are above 70°F 
(21.1°C); 
° 
OR 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 3: 
If at any time the product is held at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
but never above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure 
time at internal temperatures above 50°F 
(10°C) should be limited to 5 hours (12 
hours if S. aureus is the only pathogen of 
concern); 
° 
OR 
•	
 CRITICAL LIMIT 4: 
The product is held at internal 
temperatures below 50°F (10°C) 
throughout processing,
 
° 
OR
 
Alternatively, the product is held at 
ambient air temperatures below 50°F 
(10°C) throughout processing. 
° 
Note: The preceding recommended critical limits do not address 
internal product temperatures between 40°F (4.4°C), the 
recommended maximum storage temperature for refrigerated 
fish and fishery products, and 50°F (10°C). The recommended 
critical limits do not address such temperatures because growth of 
foodborne pathogenic bacteria is very slow at these temperatures 
and the time necessary for significant growth is longer than would be 
reasonably likely to occur in most fish and fishery product processing 
steps. However, if you have processing steps that occur at these 
temperatures that approach the maximum cumulative exposure 
times listed in Table A-2 (Appendix 4) for the pathogenic bacteria 
of concern in your product, you should consider development of a 
critical limit for control at these temperatures. The cumulative time 
and temperature critical limits above (other than the last critical limit 
for raw, ready-to-eat and cooked, ready-to-eat fish and fishery 
products) are depicted in table format below: 
Example: 
A crabmeat processor using a retort process 
identifies a series of post-cook processing 
steps (e.g., backing, picking, and packing) 
as CCPs for pathogenic bacteria growth 
and toxin formation. Initial cooling takes 
place in the cooking crates and then the 
product is first handled at temperatures of 
around 120°F (48.9°C). The processor sets a 
critical limit of maximum cumulative time 
of exposure of 4 hours at product internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C), no more 
than 1 of which is above 70°F (21.1°). This 
critical limit is selected because the crabs 
are handled while still warm (e.g., above 
80°F (26.7°C)). Cooling that takes place 
after the product is handled is included in 
the limit. 
Example: 
Another crabmeat processor using a retort 
process also identifies a series of post-cook 
processing steps (e.g., backing, picking, 
and packing) as CCPs. However, this 
product is cooled fully before handling, 
and ice is used on the product during 
processing to control time and temperature 
abuse. The processor sets a critical limit of 
a maximum product internal temperature 
of 50°F (10°C) at all times. Specifying a 
time of exposure is not necessary in this 
case, because it is not reasonably likely 
that the product would be held long 
enough that significant pathogen growth 
could occur at this temperature (e.g., 2 to 
21 days, depending upon the pathogen). 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
235 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
236 
TABLE 12-5 
CUMULATIVE TIME AND TEMPERATURE CRITICAL LIMITS 
WHEN THE PRODUCT INTERNAL 
TEMPERATURE RANGE IN ºF (ºC) IS… 
THEN THE CUMULATIVE EXPOSURE TIME AT INTERNAL
 TEMPERATURES ABOVE 50°F (10°C) IN HOURS IS1… 
1 2 3 5 12 
RAW, READY TO EAT 
>503 
(>10) 
X X2 
Alternatively, 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X 
Plus 
>70 
(>21.1) 
X 
Alternatively, 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X 
Plus 
>70 
(>21.1) 
X 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤21.1) 
X X2 
COOKED, READY TO EAT 
>504 
(>10) 
X X2 
Alternatively, 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X 
Plus 
>704 
(>21.1) 
X 
>50 to ≤ 80 
(>10 to ≤ 26.7) 
X X2 
Alternatively, 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X 
Plus 
>70 to <80 
(>21.1 to <26.7) 
X 
Alternatively, 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X 
Plus 
>70 to <80 
(>21.1 to <26.7) 
X 
>50 to ≤ 70 
(>10 to ≤ 21.1) 
X X2 
1. Time at temperatures of 135ºF (57.2ºC) and above is not counted. 
2. Where S. aureus is the only pathogen of public health significance. 
3. Temperature may exceed 70ºF (21.1ºC). 
4. Temperature may exceed 80ºF (26.7ºC). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establish Monitoring Procedures.	 •	 Make visual observations of length of 
exposure to unrefrigerated conditions (i.e., 
>40ºF (4.4ºC)) using a clock.
 
»	  What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 T he length of time of product exposure to 
unrefrigerated conditions (i.e., above 40°F 
(4.4°C)); 
The product internal temperature during  
the exposure period; 
° 
OR 
The ambient temperature of the 
processing area;
 
° 
OR
 
•	
 T
he length of time only of product exposure 
to unrefrigerated conditions (i.e., >40°F 
(4.4°C)), for critical limit 1 (raw, ready-to-eat 
and cooked, ready-to-eat); 
OR 
•	
 T
he internal temperature only of the 
product, when internal temperatures are held 
below 50°F (10°C) or above 135°F (57.2°C) 
throughout processing for critical limit 3 
for raw, ready-to-eat or critical limit 4 for 
cooked, ready-to-eat; 
OR 
•	
 T
he ambient air temperature only, when 
ambient air temperature is held below 50°F 
(10°C) throughout processing for critical limit 
3 for raw, ready-to-eat or critical limit 4 for 
cooked, ready-to-eat. 
»	  How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For product internal temperature or ambient 
air temperature: 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer);
 
° 
OR
 
•	
 F
or ambient air temperature: 
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
° 
AND/OR 
Example: 
A crabmeat pr
ocessor identifies a 
series of processing steps (e.g., backing, 
picking, and packing) as CCPs for 
pathogenic bacteria growth. The processor 
establishes a critical limit of no more 
than 1 cumulative hour of exposure to 
unrefrigerated temperature during these 
processing steps (Critical Limit 1). The 
processor uses marked product containers 
to monitor the progress of the product 
through the three processing steps. The 
time that the marked container is removed 
from and returned to refrigeration is 
monitored using a clock. 
Example: 
Another crabmeat processor with identical 
CCPs establishes a more complex set of 
critical limits: no more than 4 cumulative 
hours with product internal temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C), with no more than 
1 of those hours above 70°F (21.1°C) 
(Critical Limit 1 Alternative). This 
processor also uses marked containers 
to monitor the progress of the product 
through the process. However, in addition 
to monitoring time using a clock, the 
processor also monitors product internal 
temperature for the marked containers 
using a thermometer. This monitoring 
technique provides the processor more 
flexibility in processing but requires more 
monitoring effort. 
Example: 
A lobster meat processor identifies the 
meat removal process as a CCP for 
pathogenic bacteria growth. The operation 
is performed under near-refrigeration 
conditions (<50°F (10°C)) (Critical Limit 
4 Alternative). The processor monitors 
ambient air temperature with a digital 
data logger. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
237 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
»	  How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Continuous monitoring during processing
is accomplished by the device itself, with 
a visual check of the recorded data at 
least once per day; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For temperature-indicating devices and 
clocks:
  
At least e
very 2 hours;
 ° 
OR
 
Every batch.
 ° 
»	  Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature recording  
devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.  The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
° 
OR 
•	
 For temperature-indicating devices and 
clocks:  
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 C hill and hold the affected product until an 
evaluation of the total time and temperature 
exposure is performed; 
OR 
•	
 C
ook the product, after giving consideration 
to the fact that any S. aureus or B. cereus 
toxin that may be present may not be 
inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
crabmeat to a stuffed flounder operation), 
after giving consideration to the fact that 
any S. aureus or B. cereus toxin that may be 
present may not be inactivated by heat; 
OR 
•	
 D
estroy the product; 
OR 
•	
 D
ivert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 A dd ice to the product; 
OR 
•	
 R
eturn the affected product to the cooler; 
AND 
•	
 M
odify the process as needed to reduce the 
time and temperature exposure. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 P rocessing records showing the results of time 
and/or temperature exposure measurements. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 B efore a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected. This check can be 
accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
° 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point. Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
° 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
238 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used  
(e.g., air temperature and product internal  
temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
° 
AND 
•	
 O
nce in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations. Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time. In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks. The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	
 C
alibrate the temperature-indicating device 
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer. Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions 
of use of the device. Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration 
or the need to replace the device (perhaps 
with a more durable device). Calibration 
should be performed at a minimum of two 
temperatures that bracket the temperature 
range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	  W here appropriate to the critical limit, by 
using a study that establishes the relationship 
between exposure time and product 
temperature; 
AND 
•	
 R
eview monitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
239 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
240 
TABLE 12-6
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - UNREFRIGERATED PROCESSING CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4 - Unrefrigerated Processing Control.” This example illustrates how a blue crabmeat 
processor that handles the crabs at the beginning of backing while still hot can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of time and temperature 
abuse during unrefrigerated processing. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogen survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Backing,
in-process
cooler, picking,
and packing 
Pathogenic
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Exposure time
(i.e., time
 at internal 
temperatures 
above 50°F 
but below 
135ºF) during
backing, in-
process cooler,
picking, and 
packing should
be limited to 4
hours, as long 
as no more
than 1 of those
hours is above 
70°F 
The length of 
time of product 
exposure to 
unrefrigerated 
conditions (i.e.,
above 40°F) 
Visual 
observation 
of marked 
containers
using a clock 
Start marked 
container
approximately 
every 2 hours 
during backing,
in-process
cooler, picking,
and packing 
Production 
supervisor 
Immediately
ice product or 
move to cooler
Hold and
evaluate 
based on
total time and
temperature 
exposure 
Production 
record 
Check the dial
thermometer for 
accuracy and 
damage and to
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it daily, at 
the beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
verification, and 
corrective action 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
The product 
internal 
temperature 
during the
exposure 
period 
Dial
thermometer
Note: Control during refrigerated storage is covered under “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigerated Storage and Refrigerated Processing Control.
Note: This critical limit is necessary because the crabs are handled at internal temperatures above 80°F during backing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday. As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Ah
med, F. E. (ed.). 1991. Seafood safety. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
•	 Baek, S-Y., S-Y. Lim, D-H. Lee, K-H. Min, 
and C-M. Kim. 2000. Incidence and 
characterization of  Listeria monocytogenes  
from domestic and imported foods in Korea. 
J. Food Prot. 63:186−189. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L., and L. A. Klawitter. 1992. 
Effectiveness of  Carnobacterium piscicola  
LK5 for controlling the growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes Scott A in refrigerated foods. 
J. Food Safety 12:219−236. 
•	 Du
ffes, F., C. Corre, F. Leroi, X. Dousset, 
and P. Boyaval. 1999. Inhibition of Listeria 
monocytogenes by in situ produced and 
semipurified bacteriocins on Carnobacterium 
spp. on vacuum-packed, refrigerated cold-
smoked salmon. J. Food Prot. 62:1394−1403. 
•	 Fa
rber, J. M. 1991. Listeria monocytogenes in fish 
products. J. Food Prot. 54(12):922−924, 934. 
•	 Fo
od and Agriculture Organization and 
World Health Organization. 2005. Risk 
assessment of Vibrio cholerae 01 and 0139 
in warm-water shrimp in international trade. 
Microbiological risk assessment series no. 9. 
FAO, Rome, Italy. 
•	 Fo
od and Agriculture Organization and 
World Health Organization. 2005. Risk 
assessment of Vibrio vulnificus in raw 
oysters: interpretative summary and technical 
report. Microbiological risk assessment series 
no. 8. FAO, Rome, Italy, FAO. 
•	 Ge
can, J. S., R. Bandler, and W. F. 
Staruskiewcz. 1994. Fresh and frozen 
shrimp: a profile of filth, microbiological 
contamination, and decomposition. J. Food 
Prot. 57:154158. 
•	 Hood, M. A., G. E. Ness, G. E. Rodrick, and 
N. J. Blake. April 1983. Effects of storage 
on microbial loads of two commercially 
important shellfish species, Crassostrea 
virginica and  Mercenaria campechiensis. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 45:1221−1228. 
•	 Huss, H. H., 1993. Assurance of seafood 
quality. FAO fisheries technical paper, no. 
334. FAO, Rome, Italy. 169p. 
•	 Hu
ss, H. H. (ed.). 1993. Quality and quality 
changes in fresh fish. FAO fisheries technical 
paper, no. 346. FAO, Rome, Italy. 
•	 Hu
ss, H. H. 1997. Control of indigenous 
pathogenic bacteria in seafood. Food 
Control. 8:91−98. 
•	 Je
mmi, T., and A. Keusch. 1992. Behavior of 
Listeria monocytogenes during processing 
and storage of experimentally contaminated 
hot-smoked trout. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
15:339−346. 
•	 Hu
ss, H. H., A. Reilly, and P. K. Ben 
Embarek. 2000. Prevention and control 
of hazards in seafood. Food Control. 
11:149−156. 
•	 Jø
rgensen, L. V., and H. H. Huss. 1998. 
Prevalence and growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in naturally contaminated 
seafood. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 42:127−131. 
•	 Leung, C. K., Y. W. Huang, and M. 
A. Harrison. 1992. Fate of Listeria 
monocytogenes and Aeromonas hydrophila  
on packaged channel catfish fillets stored at 
4 C. J. Food Prot. 55:728−730. 
•	 Mo
rris, G. J., and R. E. Black. 1985. Cholera 
and other vibrioses in the United States. New 
Engl. J. Med. 12:343−350. 
•	 Ni
elsen, H.-J. S., and P. Zeuthen. 1984. 
Growth of pathogenic bacteria in sliced 
vacuum-packed bologna-type sausage 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
241 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
a
s influenced by temperature and gas 
permeability of packaging film. Food Microb. 
1:229−243. 
•	 Pal
umbo, S. A. 1986. Is refrigeration enough 
to restrain foodbourne pathogens? J. Food 
Prot. 49: 1003−1009. 
•	 Peixotto, S. S., G. Finne, M. O. Hanna, and 
C. Vanderzant. 1979. Presence, growth and 
survival of Yersinia entercolitica in oysters,  
shrimp and crab. J. Food Prot. 42:974−981.    
•	 Peterson, M. E., G. A. Pelroy, R. N. Paranjpye, 
F. T. Poysky, J. S. Almond, and M. W. Eklund. 
1993. Parameters for control of  Listeria 
monocytogenes in smoked fishery products: 
sodium chloride and packaging method. J 
Food Prot. 56:938−943. 
•	 Phi
lips, F. A., and T. Peeler. December 1972. 
Bacteriological survey of the blue crab 
industry. Appl. Microbiol. 24(6):958−966. 
•	 Rah
mati, T., and R. Labbe. 2007. Incidence 
and enterotoxigenicity of Clostridium 
perfringens and Bacillus cereus from retail 
seafood. IAFP Annual Meeting. P128. 
•	 Refr
igerated Foods and Microbiological 
Criteria Committee of the National Food 
Processors Association. 1988. Factors 
to be considered in establishing good 
manufacturing practices for the production 
of refrigerated foods. Dairy and Food Sanit. 
8:288−291. 
•	 Riv
ituso, C. P. and Snyder, O. P. 1981. 
Bacterial growth at foodservice operating 
temperatures. J. Food Prot. 44:770−775. 
•	 Rod
ríguez, Ó., V. Losada, S. P. Aubourg, 
and J. Barros-Velázquez. 2004. Enhanced 
shelf-life of chilled European hake 
(Merluccius merluccius) stored in slurry 
ice as determined by sensory analysis and 
assessment of microbiological activity. Food 
Res. Int’l. 37(8):749−757. 
•	 Ross
o, L., J. R. Lobry, J. P. Flandrois. 1993 
An unexpected correlation between cardinal 
temperature of microbial growth highlighted 
by a new mode. J. Theor. Biol. 162:447−463. 
•	 Ross
o, L., S. Bajard, J. P. Flandrois, C. 
Lahellec, J. Fournaud, and P. Veit. 1996. 
Differential growth of Listeria monocytogenes 
at 4 and 8°C: consequences for the shelf life 
of chilled products. 59:944−949. 
•	 Satoshi, I., A. Nakama, Y. Arai, Y. Kokubo, T. 
Maruyama, A. Saito, T. Yoshida, M. Terao, S. 
Yamamoto, and S. Kumagai. 2000. Prevalence 
and contamination levels of Listeria 
monoocytogenes in retail foods in Japan. Int. 
J. Food Microb. 59:73−77. 
•	 Son
, N. T., and G. H. Fleet. December 1980. 
Behavior of pathogenic bacteria in the oyster, 
Crassostrea commercialis, during depuration, 
relaying and storage. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 40(6):994−1002. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Foodborne pathogenic microorganisms  
and natural toxins handbook.  In The  
bad bug book. http://www.fda.gov/ 
Fo
od/FoodSafety/FoodborneIllness/ 
rneIllnessFoodbornePathogensNaturalToxins/ 
BadBugBook/default.htm. 
•	 U.S
. Food and Drug Administration. 2009. 
Food code. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, FDA, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
FoodSafety/RetailFoodProtection/FoodCode/ 
FoodCode2009/default.htm. 
•	 U .S. Food and Drug Administration.  
2005. Quantitative risk assessment on the  
public health impact of pathogenic Vibrio  
parahaemolyticus in raw oysters. Department  
of Health and Human Services, Public  
Health Service, FDA, Center for Food Safety  
and Applied Nutrition, College Park, MD.  
http://www.fda.gov/Food/ScienceResearch/ 
ResearchAreas/RiskAssessmentSafetyAssessment/ 
ucm050421.htm 
•	 U.S
. Food and Drug Administration and U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. 2003. Quantitative 
assessment of the relative risk to public health 
from foodborne Listeria monocytogenes among 
selected categories of ready-to-eat foods. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
242 
 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/ScienceResearch/ 
ResearchAreas/RiskAssessmentSafetyAssessment/ 
ucm183966.htm. 
•	 Wa
llace, B. J., J. J. Guzewich, M. Cambridge, 
and S. Altekruse. 1999. Seafood-associated 
disease outbreaks in New York, 1980-1994. 
Amer. J. Prev. Med. 17:48−54. 
•	 Wa
rd, D. R, and C. R. Hackney (ed.). 1991. 
Microbiology of marine food products. Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY. 
•	 Wentz, B. A., A. P. Duran, A. Swartzentruber, 
A. H. Schwab, F. D. McClure, D. Archer, and 
R. B. Read, Jr. 1985. Microbiological quality 
of crabmeat during processing. J. Food Prot. 
48:44−49. 
•	 Wo
ng, H.-C., M.-C. Chen, S.-H. Liu, and D.­
P. Lin. 1999. Incidence of highly genetically 
diversified Vibrio parahaemolyticus in 
seafood imported from Asian countries. Int. 
J. Food Microbiol. 52:181−188. 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
243 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 12: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation (Other Than Clostridium botulinum) as a Result of Time and Temperature Abuse 
244
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum) toxin 
formation can result in consumer illness and 
death.  It is the toxin responsible for botulism. 
About 10 outbreaks of foodborne botulism occur 
annually in the United States, from all sources. 
Symptoms include: weakness, vertigo, double 
vision, difficulty in speaking, swallowing and 
breathing, abdominal swelling, constipation, 
paralysis, and death.  Symptoms start from 18 
hours to 36 hours after consumption.  Everyone 
is susceptible to intoxication by C. botulinum 
toxin; only a few micrograms of the toxin can 
cause illness in a healthy adult.  Mortality is high; 
without the antitoxin and respiratory support, 
death is likely. 
This chapter covers the hazard of C. botulinum 
growth and toxin formation as a result of time and 
temperature abuse during processing, storage, and 
distribution. 
•	
 Strategies for controlling pathogen growth 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogens in fish and fishery products. They 
include: 
•	
 C
ontrolling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by this chapter for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in this chapter); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth  
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in this chapter); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
and after the cooking process performed 
immediately before reduced oxygen packaging 
(covered in Chapter 18); 
•	
 C
ontrolling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide)  to refrigeration 
to control pathogens from the harvest area 
(covered in Chapter 4); 
•	
 M
anaging the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
production (covered generally in Chapter 
12; for C. botulinum, in this chapter; and for 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) in hydrated 
batter mixes, in Chapter 15); 
•	
 K
illing pathogenic bacteria by cooking or 
pasteurization (covered in Chapter 16), or 
retorting (covered by the Thermally Processed 
Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically 
Sealed Containers regulation, 21 CFR 113 
(hereinafter, the Low-Acid Canned Foods 
(LACF) Regulation)); 
•	
 K
illing pathogenic bacteria by processes that 
retain the raw product characteristics (covered 
in Chapter 17). 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
245 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•	
 Formation of C. botulinum toxin 
When C. botulinum grows, it can produce a 
potent toxin, one of the most poisonous naturally 
occurring substances known.  The toxin can be 
destroyed by heat (e.g., boiling for 10 minutes), 
but, because of its potency, you should not rely 
on this as a means of control. 
The strains of C. botulinum can be divided  
into two groups, the proteolytic group (i.e.,  
those that break down proteins) and the non­
proteolytic group (i.e., those that do not break  
down proteins).  The proteolytic group includes  
C. botulinum type A and some of types B and F.   
The non-proteolytic group includes C. botulinum  
type E and some of types B and F.  
The vegetative cells of all types of C. botulinum  
are easily killed by heat.   However,  C. botulinum  
is able to produce spores.  In this state, the  
pathogen is very resistant to heat.  The spores  
of the proteolytic group are much more resistant  
to heat than are those of the non-proteolytic  
group (i.e., they require a canning process to be  
destroyed).  Table A-4 (Appendix 4) provides  
guidance about the conditions under which  
the spores of the most heat-resistant form  
of non-proteolytic  C. botulinum, type B, are  
killed.  However, there are some indications  
that substances that may be naturally present  
in some products (e.g., dungeness crabmeat),  
such as lysozyme, may enable non-proteolytic  
C. botulinum to more easily recover after heat  
damage, resulting in the need for a considerably  
more stringent process to ensure destruction.  
C. botulinum is able to produce toxin when 
a product in which it is present is exposed to 
temperatures favorable for growth for sufficient 
time.  Table A-1 (Appendix 4) provides guidance 
about the conditions under which C. botulinum 
and other pathogenic bacteria are able to grow. 
Table A-2 (Appendix 4) provides guidance about 
the time necessary at various temperatures for 
toxin formation to occur. 
Packaging conditions that reduce the amount 
of oxygen present in the package (e.g., vacuum 
packaging and modified atmosphere packaging) 
extend the shelf life of a product by inhibiting 
the growth of aerobic spoilage bacteria.  There 
is a safety concern with these products because 
there is an increased potential for the formation 
of C. botulinum toxin before spoilage makes the 
product unacceptable to consumers. 
C. botulinum forms toxin more rapidly at higher 
temperatures than at lower temperatures.  The 
minimum temperature for growth and toxin 
formation by C. botulinum type E and non­
proteolytic types B and F is 38°F (3.3°C).  For 
type A and proteolytic types B and F, the 
minimum temperature for growth is 50°F (10°C). 
As the shelf life of refrigerated foods is increased, 
more time is available for C. botulinum growth 
and toxin formation.  As storage temperatures 
increase, the time required for toxin formation is 
significantly shortened.  You should expect that at 
some point during storage, distribution, display, 
or consumer handling of refrigerated foods, safe 
refrigeration temperatures will not be maintained 
(especially for the non-proteolytic group).  Surveys 
of retail display cases indicate that temperatures 
of 45 to 50°F (7 to 10°C) are not uncommon. 
Surveys of home refrigerators indicate that 
temperatures can exceed 50°F (10°C). 
In reduced oxygen packaged products in which  
the spores of non-proteolytic C. botulinum  
are inhibited or destroyed (e.g., smoked fish,  
pasteurized crabmeat, and pasteurized surimi),  
a normal refrigeration temperature of 40°F  
(4.4°C) is appropriate because it will limit  
the growth of proteolytic C. botulinum and  
other pathogens that may be present.  Even  
in pasteurized products where non-proteolytic  
C. botulinum is the target organism for the  
pasteurization process, and vegetative pathogens,  
such as Listeria monocytogenes, are not likely  
to be present (e.g., pasteurized crabmeat and  
pasteurized surimi), a storage temperature of  
40°F (4.4°C) is still appropriate because of the  
potential for survival through the pasteurization  
process and recovery of spores of non-proteolytic  
C. botulinum, aided by naturally occurring  
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substances, such as lysozyme.  In this case, 
refrigeration serves as a prudent second barrier. 
However, in reduced oxygen packaged products 
in which refrigeration is the sole barrier to 
outgrowth of non-proteolytic C. botulinum and 
the spores have not been destroyed (e.g., vacuum-
packaged refrigerated raw fish, vacuum-packaged 
refrigerated unpasteurized crayfish meat, and 
reduced oxygen packaged unpasteurized 
dungeness crabmeat), the temperature should be 
maintained below 38°F (3.3°C) from packing to 
consumption.  Ordinarily you, as a processor, can 
ensure that temperatures are maintained below 
38°F (3.3°C) while the product is in your control. 
However, the current U.S. food distribution 
system does not ensure the maintenance of these 
temperatures after the product leaves your control. 
The use of a Time-Temperature Indicator (TTI) on 
each consumer package may be an appropriate 
means of overcoming these problems in the 
distribution system for reduced oxygen packaged 
products in which refrigeration is the sole barrier 
to outgrowth of non-proteolytic C. botulinum and 
in which the spores have not been destroyed. 
A TTI is a device that monitors the time and 
temperature of exposure of the package and 
alerts the consumer or end user if a safe exposure 
limit has been exceeded.  If a TTI is used, it 
should be validated to ensure that it is fit for its 
intended purpose and verified that it is functional 
at the time of use.  It should be designed to alert 
the consumer (e.g., a color change) that an unsafe 
time and temperature exposure has occurred 
that may result in C. botulinum toxin formation. 
Additionally, the alert should remain perpetually 
visible after it has been triggered, regardless of 
environmental conditions that could reasonably 
be expected to occur thereafter.  Skinner, G. E., 
and J. W. Larkin in “Conservative prediction of 
time to Clostridium botulinum toxin formation for 
use with time-temperature indicators to ensure 
the safety of foods,” Journal of Food Protection, 
61:1154-1160 (1998), describe a safe time and 
temperature exposure curve (“Skinner-Larkin 
curve”) that may be useful in evaluating the 
suitability of a TTI for control of C. botulinum 
toxin formation in reduced oxygen packaged fish 
and fishery products. 
Alternatively, products of this type may be safely 
marketed frozen, with appropriate labeling 
to ensure that it is held frozen throughout 
distribution.  For some reduced oxygen packaged 
products, control of C. botulinum can be 
achieved by breaking the vacuum seal before the 
product leaves the processor’s control. 
The guidance in this chapter emphasizes 
preventive measures for the control of non­
proteolytic strains of C. botulinum in products 
that are contained in reduced oxygen packaging. 
As was previously described, this emphasis 
is because such an environment extends the 
shelf life of a refrigerated product in a way that, 
under moderate temperature abuse, favors C. 
botulinum growth and toxin formation over 
aerobic spoilage.  It is also possible for both 
non-proteolytic and proteolytic C. botulinum 
to grow and produce toxin in a product that is 
not reduced oxygen packaged and is subjected 
to severe temperature abuse.  This is the case 
because of the development within the product 
of microenvironments that support its growth. 
However, this type of severe temperature abuse 
of refrigerated products is not reasonably likely 
to occur in the processing environment of most 
fish or fishery products and the Current Good 
Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing, Packing, 
or Holding Human Food regulation, 21 CFR 110, 
requires refrigeration of foods that support the 
growth of pathogenic microorganisms. 
•	
 Sources of C. botulinum 
C. botulinum can enter the process on raw 
materials.  The spores of C. botulinum are very 
common.  They have been found in the gills 
and viscera of finfish, crabs, and shellfish.  C. 
botulinum type E is the most common form found 
in freshwater and marine environments.  Types 
A and B are generally found on land but may 
also be occasionally found in water.  It should be 
assumed that C. botulinum will be present in any 
raw fishery product, particularly in the viscera. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
247 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Because spores are known to be present in the 
viscera, any product that will be preserved by 
salting, drying, pickling, or fermentation should 
be eviscerated prior to processing (see the 
“Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 540.650).  Without 
evisceration, toxin formation is possible during the 
process, even with strict control of temperature. 
Evisceration of fish is the careful and complete 
removal of all internal organs in the body cavity 
without puncturing or cutting them, including 
gonads.  If even a portion of the viscera or its 
contents is left behind, the risk of toxin formation 
by C. botulinum remains.  Uneviscerated small 
fish, less than 5 inches in length (e.g., anchovies 
and herring sprats), for which processing eliminates 
preformed toxin, prevents toxin formation during 
processing and that reach a water phase salt 
content of 10% in refrigerated finished products, 
or a water activity of below 0.85 in shelf-stable 
finished products, or a pH of 4.6 or less in shelf-
stable finished products, are not subject to the 
evisceration recommendation. 
Note: The water phase salt content of 10% is based on the control of 
C. botulinum type A and proteolytic types B and F . 
Note: 
The water activity value of below 0.85 is based on the 
minimum water activity for toxin production of S. aureus. 
•	 Reduced oxygen packaging 
A number of conditions can result in the creation 
of a reduced oxygen environment in packaged 
fish and fishery products.  They include: 
•	
 V
acuum, modified, or controlled atmosphere 
packaging.  These packaging methods 
generally directly reduce the amount of 
oxygen in the package; 
•	
 P
ackaging in hermetically sealed containers 
(e.g., double-seamed cans, glass jars 
with sealed lids, and heat-sealed plastic 
containers), or packing in deep containers 
from which the air is expressed (e.g., caviar 
in large containers), or packing in oil.  These 
and similar processing and packaging 
techniques prevent the entry of oxygen into 
the container.  Any oxygen present at the 
time of packaging (including oxygen that 
may be added during modified atmosphere 
packaging) may be rapidly depleted by the 
activity of spoilage bacteria, resulting in the 
formation of a reduced oxygen environment. 
Packaging that provides an oxygen transmission 
rate (in the final package) of at least 10,000 cc/ 
m
2/24 hours at 24ºC can be regarded as an 
oxygen-permeable packaging material for fishery 
products.  The oxygen transmission rate of 
packaging material is listed in the packaging 
specifications that can be obtained from the 
packaging manufacturer. 
An oxygen-permeable package should provide 
sufficient exchange of oxygen to allow aerobic 
spoilage organisms to grow and spoil the product 
before toxin is produced under moderate abuse 
temperatures.  Particular care should be taken in 
determining the safety of a packaging material for a 
product in which the spoilage organisms have been 
eliminated or significantly reduced by processes 
such as high pressure processing.  The generally 
recommended 10,000 cc/m
2/24 hours at 24ºC 
transmission rate may not be suitable in this case. 
Use of an oxygen-permeable package may not 
compensate for the restriction to oxygen exchange 
created by practices such as packing in oil or in 
deep containers from which the air is expressed 
or the use of oxygen scavengers in the packaging. 
•	
 Control of C. botulinum 
There are a number of strategies to prevent C. 
botulinum growth and toxin formation during 
processing, storage, and distribution of finished 
fish and fishery products.  They include: 
For products that do not require refrigeration 
(i.e., shelf-stable products): 
•	 H eating the finished product in its final 
container sufficiently by retorting to destroy 
the spores of C. botulinum types A B, E, 
and F (e.g., canned fish).  This strategy is 
covered by the LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 
113, and these controls are not required to 
be included in your Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) plan; 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
248 
 
 
•	 Controlling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
fi
nished product to 4.6 or below, to prevent 
growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum 
types A, B, E, and F (e.g., shelf-stable 
acidified products).  This strategy is covered 
by the Acidified Foods regulation, 21 CFR 
114, and these controls are not required to be 
included in your HACCP plan; 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available in the product (water activity) to 
0.85 or below by drying, to prevent growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum types  
A, B, E, and F and other pathogens that may 
be present in the product (e.g., shelf-stable 
dried products).  This strategy is covered by 
Chapter 14; 
•	 Co ntrolling the amount of salt in the product 
to 20% water phase salt (wps) or more, to 
prevent the growth of C. botulinum types A, 
B, E, and F and other pathogens that may 
be present in the product (e.g., shelf-stable 
salted products).  This strategy is covered 
in this chapter.  Water phase salt is the 
concentration of salt in the water-portion of 
the fish flesh and calculated as follows:  (% 
NaCl X 100)/(% NaCl + % moisture) = % NaCl 
in water phase.  The relationship between 
percent water phase salt and water activity in 
fish is described in the following graph. 
Relationship of Water Activity to Water Phase 
Salt in NaCl/Water Solutions
1 
1.00 
0.98 y it 0.96 tiv c0.94 r a0.92 te a0.90 W0.88 
0.86 
0.84 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
Percent water phase salt 
1. This relationship is generally valid for fish products when salt (sodium chloride) is the primary means of 
binding water.  The specific food matrix and the use of other salts or water binding agents could affect the 
exact relationship. If you intend to use this relationship in your control strategy, you should determine the 
exact relationship in your product by conducting a study. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
249 
For products that require refrigeration: type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in 
the finished product through refrigerated 
storage (e.g., refrigerated dried fish).  Drying 
is covered in Chapter 14, controlling the 
growth of proteolytic C. botulinum through  
refrigeration is covered in this chapter, and 
controlling the growth of other pathogenic 
bacteria through refrigeration is covered in 
Chapter 12; 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that 
is available in the product (water activity) 
to 0.97 or below to inhibit the growth of 
C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F by drying, and then 
controlling the growth of C. botulinum  
•	 H
eating the finished product in its final 
container sufficiently by pasteurization to 
destroy the spores of C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F, and 
then minimizing the risk of recontamination 
by controlling seam closures and cooling 
water, and next controlling the growth 
of the surviving C. botulinum type A and 
proteolytic types B and F in the finished 
product with refrigerated storage (e.g.. 
pasteurized crabmeat and some pasteurized 
surimi-based products).  Pasteurization 
is covered in Chapter 16, controlling 
recontamination after pasteurization is  
covered in Chapter 18, and controlling the 
growth of proteolytic C. botulinum through  
•	
 Controlling the level of pH to 5 or below, salt 
to 5% wps or more, moisture (water activity) 
to 0.97 or below, or some combination 
of these barriers, in the finished product 
sufficiently to prevent the growth of C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F by formulation, and then 
controlling the growth of C. botulinum  
type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in 
the finished product with refrigerated 
storage (e.g., refrigerated acidified (pickled) 
products).  Controlling the growth of non-
proteolytic  C. botulinum through formulation 
is covered in this chapter, controlling the 
growth of proteolytic C. botulinum through  
refrigeration is covered in this chapter, and 
controlling the growth of other pathogenic 
bacteria through refrigeration is covered in 
Chapter 12; 
r
efrigeration is covered in this chapter; 
•	
 Heating the product sufficiently to destroy 
the spores of C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F, and then 
minimizing the risk of recontamination 
by hot filling the product into the final 
container in a sanitary, continuous, closed 
filling system and controlling seam closures 
and cooling water, and next controlling 
the growth of the surviving C. botulinum  
type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in the 
finished product with refrigerated storage 
(e.g., vacuum packed soups, chowders, and 
sauces).  Specialized cooking processes  
are covered in Chapter 16, prevention of 
recontamination after specialized cooking 
processes is covered in Chapter 18, 
controlling the growth of proteolytic C.  
botulinum through refrigeration is covered 
in this chapter, and controlling the growth 
of other pathogenic bacteria through 
refrigeration is covered in Chapter 12; 
•	
 Controlling the amount of salt and 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in 
the finished product, in combination with 
other barriers, such as smoke, heat damage, 
and competitive bacteria, sufficiently to 
prevent the growth of C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F, and 
then controlling the growth of C. botulinum  
type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in the 
finished product with refrigerated storage 
(e.g., salted, smoked, or smoke-flavored fish).  
Controlling the growth of non-proteolytic 
C. botulinum through salting and smoking 
is covered in this chapter, controlling the 
growth of proteolytic C. botulinum through  
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
250 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refrigeration is covered in this chapter, and 
controlling the growth of other pathogenic 
bacteria through refrigeration is covered in 
Chapter 12; 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt in the 
finished product, in combination with heat 
damage from pasteurization in the finished 
product container, sufficiently to prevent 
the growth of C. botulinum type E and 
nonproteolytic types B and F, and then 
controlling the growth of C. botulinum 
type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in 
the finished product with refrigerated 
storage (e.g., some pasteurized surimi­
based products).  Controlling the growth 
of non-proteolytic C. botulinum through 
a combination of salt and heat damage 
is covered in this chapter, controlling the 
growth of proteolytic C. botulinum through 
refrigeration is covered in this chapter, and 
controlling the growth of other pathogenic 
bacteria through refrigeration is covered in 
Chapter 12. 
Examples of C. botulinum control in specific 
products: 
•	 Refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged smoked and smoke-flavored fish 
Achieving the proper concentration of 
salt and nitrite in the flesh of refrigerated, 
reduced oxygen packaged smoked and 
smoke-flavored fish is necessary to prevent 
the formation of toxin by C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F during 
storage and distribution.  Salt works along 
with smoke and any nitrites that are added 
to prevent growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F.  Note that nitrites should be used 
only in salmon, sable, shad, chubs, and tuna, 
according to 21 CFR 172.175 and 21 CFR 
172.177 , and should not exceed a level of 
200 ppm in salmon, sable, shad, chubs and 
10 ppm in tuna. 
In hot-smoked products, heat damage to 
the spores of C. botulinum type E and non­
proteolytic types B and F also helps prevent 
toxin formation.  In these products, control of 
the heating process is critical to the safety of 
the finished product.  It is important to note, 
however, that this same heating process also 
reduces the numbers of naturally occurring 
spoilage organisms.  The spoilage organisms 
would otherwise have competed with, and 
inhibited the growth of, C. botulinum. 
In cold-smoked fish, it is important that 
the product does not receive so much heat 
that the numbers of spoilage organisms 
are significantly reduced. This is important 
because spoilage organisms must be present 
to inhibit the growth and toxin formation 
of C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F.  This inhibition is important 
in cold-smoked fish because the heat applied 
during this process is not adequate to 
weaken the C. botulinum spores.  Control 
of the temperature during the cold-smoking 
process to ensure survival of the spoilage 
organisms is, therefore, critical to the safety 
of the finished product. 
The interplay of these inhibitory effects 
(i.e., salt, temperature, smoke, and nitrite) 
is complex.  Control of the brining or dry 
salting process is clearly critical to ensure that 
there is sufficient salt in the finished product. 
However, preventing toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F is made even more complex by the 
fact that adequate salt levels are not usually 
achieved during brining. Proper drying 
during smoking is also critical in order to 
achieve the finished product water phase 
salt level (i.e., the concentration of salt in 
the water portion of the fish flesh) needed 
to inhibit growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum. 
This chapter covers the control procedures 
described above. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
251 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You should ordinarily restrict brining, dry 
salting, and smoking loads to single species 
and to fish portions of approximately 
uniform size.  This restriction minimizes the 
complexity of controlling the operation.  You 
should treat brine to minimize microbial 
contamination or periodically replace it as a 
good manufacturing practice control. 
The combination of inhibitory effects that are 
present in smoked and smoke-flavored fish 
are not adequate to prevent toxin formation 
by C. botulinum type A and proteolytic types 
B and F.  Strict refrigeration control (i.e., at 
or below 40°F (4.4°C)) during storage and 
distribution should be maintained to prevent 
growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum 
type A and proteolytic types B and F and 
other pathogens that may be present in 
these products.  Controlling the growth of 
proteolytic C. botulinum through refrigeration 
is covered in this chapter, and controlling the 
growth of other pathogenic bacteria through 
refrigeration is covered in Chapter 12. 
•	 Refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged, pasteurized fishery products 
Refrigerated, reduced oxygen packaged, 
pasteurized fishery products fall into two 
categories:  (1) those which are pasteurized 
in the final container; and (2) those which 
are cooked in a kettle and then hot filled 
into the final container in a continuous, 
closed filling system (e.g., heat-and-fill 
soups, chowders, and sauces).  In both 
cases, ordinarily the heating process should 
be sufficient to destroy the spores of C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F.  In neither case is it likely that 
the heating process will be sufficient to 
destroy the spores of C. botulinum type A 
and proteolytic types B and F.  Therefore, 
strict refrigeration control (i.e., at or below 
40°F (4.4°C)) should be maintained during 
storage and distribution to prevent growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type A 
and proteolytic types B and F.  Refrigeration 
also serves as a prudent second barrier 
because of the potential survival through 
the pasteurization process and recovery of 
spores of non-proteolytic C. botulinum, aided 
by naturally occurring substances, such as 
lysozyme.  Cooking and pasteurization are 
covered in Chapter 16, and controlling the 
growth of C. botulinum through refrigeration 
is covered in this chapter. 
In the second category of products, filling 
the product into the final container while it is 
still hot in a continuous, closed filling system 
(i.e., hot filling) is also critical to the safety of 
the finished product because it minimizes the 
risk of recontamination of the product with 
pathogens, including C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F.  This control 
strategy applies to products such as soups, 
chowders, and sauces that are filled directly 
from the cooking kettle, where the risk of 
recontamination is minimized.  It may not 
apply to products such as crabmeat, lobster 
meat, or crayfish meat or to other products 
that are handled between cooking and filling. 
Control of hot filling is covered in Chapter 18. 
Chapter 18 also covers other controls that 
may be necessary to prevent recontamination, 
including controlling container sealing and 
controlling contamination of container 
cooling water.  These controls may be critical 
to the safety of both categories of products. 
E
xamples of properly pasteurized products 
follow:  fish and fishery products generally 
(e.g., surimi-based products, soups, 
or sauces) pasteurized to a minimum 
cumulative total lethality of F
 (F )
= 10 minutes, where z = 12.6°F (7°C) for  
temperatures less than 194°F (90°C), and  
z = 18°F (10°C) for temperatures above  
194°F (90°C); blue crabmeat pasteurized  
to a minimum cumulative total lethality of  
F
194°F 90°C
 (F ) = 31 minutes, where z = 16°F  
(9°C); and dungeness crabmeat pasteurized  
to a minimum cumulative total lethality of  
F
185°F 85°C
 (F ) = 5
7 minutes, where z = 15.5°F 194°F 90°C
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
252 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(8.6°C).  Equivalent processes at different 
temperatures can be calculated using the z 
values provided. 
EXAMPLES OF PROPERLY PASTEURIZED 
PRODUCTS 
PRODUCT MINIMUM CUMULATIVE 
TOTAL LETHALITY Z VALUE 
Fish and fishery 
products 
generally 
(e.g., surimi­
based products, 
soups, or 
sauces) 
F194°F (F90°C) = 10 minutes 12.6°F (7°C), for 
temperatures 
less than 194°F 
(90°C) 
18°F (10°C) for 
temperatures 
above 194°F 
(90°C) 
Blue crabmeat F185°F (F85°C) = 31 minutes 16°F (9°C) 
Dungeness 
crabmeat 
F194°F (F90°C) = 57 minutes 15.5°F (8.6°C) 
In some pasteurized surimi-based 
products, salt, in combination with a milder 
pasteurization process, in the finished product 
container works to prevent growth and toxin 
formation by C. botulinum type E and non­
proteolytic types B and F.  An example of a 
properly pasteurized surimi-based product 
in which 2.4% wps is present is one that has 
been pasteurized at an internal temperature 
of 185°F (85°C) for at least 15 minutes.  This 
process may not be suitable for other types of 
products because of the unique formulation 
and processing involved in the manufacture of 
surimi-based products. 
•	 Refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged pickled fish, salted fish, caviar, 
and similar products 
In pickled fish, salted fish, caviar, and similar 
products that have not been preserved 
sufficiently for them to be shelf stable, 
growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum 
type E and non-proteolytic types B and F is 
controlled by one of the following: 
•	 Adding sufficient salt to produce 
a water phase salt le
vel (i.e., the 
concentration of salt in the water 
portion of the fish flesh) of at least 5%; 
•	 
•	 
•	 
Adding suf
ficient acid to reduce 
the acidity (pH) to 5.0 or below; 
Reducing the amount of moisture 
that is available for growth (water 
activity) to below 0.97 (e.g., by 
adding salt or other substances that 
“bind” the available water); or 
Making a combination of salt, pH,  
and/or water activity adjustments 
that, when combined, prevents the 
growth of C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F (to be 
established by a scientific study).  
Much like smoked products, in some of these 
products the interplay of these inhibitory 
effects (i.e., salt, water activity, and pH) can 
be complex.  Control of the brining, pickling, 
or formulation steps is, therefore, critical to 
ensure that there are sufficient barriers in the 
finished product to prevent the growth and 
toxin formation of C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F during storage 
and distribution. These control procedures 
are covered in this chapter. 
You should ordinarily restrict brining and 
pickling loads to single species and to fish 
portions of approximately uniform size. 
This restriction minimizes the complexity of 
controlling the operation.  You should treat 
brine to minimize microbial contamination 
or periodically replace it as a good 
manufacturing practice control. 
The controls discussed above are not 
sufficient to prevent toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type A and proteolytic types B 
and F.  Strict refrigeration control (i.e., at 
or below 40°F (4.4°C)) during storage and 
distribution should, therefore, be maintained 
to prevent growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type A and proteolytic types B and 
F and other pathogens that may be present 
in these products.  Controlling the growth of 
proteolytic C. botulinum through refrigeration 
is covered in this chapter, and controlling the 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
253 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growth of other pathogenic bacteria through 
refrigeration is covered in Chapter 12. 
•	 Refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged raw, unpreserved fish and 
unpasteurized, cooked fishery products 
For refrigerated, reduced oxygen packaged 
raw, unpreserved fish (e.g., refrigerated, 
vacuum-packaged fish fillets) and refrigerated, 
reduced oxygen packaged, unpasteurized, 
cooked fishery products (e.g., refrigerated, 
vacuum-packaged, unpasteurized crabmeat, 
lobster meat, or crayfish meat), the sole 
barrier to toxin formation by C. botulinum 
type E and non-proteolytic types B and 
F during finished product storage and 
distribution is refrigeration.  These types of C. 
botulinum will grow at temperatures as low 
as 38°F (3.3°C).  As was previously noted, 
maintenance of temperatures below 38°F 
(3.3°C) after the product leaves your control 
and enters the distribution system cannot 
normally be ensured.  The use of a TTI on 
the smallest unit of packaging (i.e., the unit 
of packaging that will not be distributed 
any further, usually consumer or end-user 
package) may be an appropriate means of 
overcoming these problems in the distribution 
system.  This chapter provides controls for the 
application of TTIs for packaging. 
If you intend to package these products in 
a reduced oxygen package and you do not 
intend to apply a TTI on each consumer 
package, you should evaluate the effectiveness 
of other preventive measures, either singularly, 
or in combination, that may be effective in 
preventing growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum. Such evaluation is customarily 
accomplished by conducting an inoculated 
pack study under moderate abuse conditions. 
A suitable protocol for the performance of 
such studies is contained in a 1992 publication 
by the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods, “Vacuum 
or modified atmosphere packaging for 
refrigerated, raw fishery products.” 
•	 Frozen, reduced oxygen packaged raw, 
unpreserved fish and unpasteurized, cooked 
fishery products 
For frozen, reduced oxygen packaged raw, 
unpreserved fish (e.g., frozen, vacuum-
packaged fish fillets) and frozen, reduced 
oxygen packaged, unpasteurized, cooked 
fishery products (e.g., frozen, vacuum-
packaged, unpasteurized crabmeat, lobster 
meat, or crayfish meat), the sole barrier to 
toxin formation by C. botulinum type E 
and non-proteolytic types B and F during 
finished product storage and distribution 
is freezing.  Because these products may 
appear to the retailer, consumer, or end user 
to be intended to be refrigerated, rather than 
frozen, labeling to ensure that they are held 
frozen throughout distribution is critical to 
their safety. 
Controls should be in place to ensure that 
such products are immediately frozen after 
processing, maintained frozen throughout 
storage in your facility, and labeled to 
be held frozen and to be thawed under 
refrigeration immediately before use (e.g., 
“Important, keep frozen until used, thaw 
under refrigeration immediately before use”). 
Frozen, reduced oxygen packaged products 
that are customarily cooked by the consumer 
or end user in the frozen state (e.g., boil-in­
bag products and frozen fish sticks) need not 
be labeled to be thawed under refrigeration. 
For purposes of hazard analysis, other frozen 
products that do not contain the “keep 
frozen” statement should be evaluated as if 
they will be stored refrigerated because the 
consumer or end user would not have been 
warned to keep them frozen. 
Control procedures to ensure that product 
is properly labeled with “keep frozen” 
instructions are covered in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
254 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Control in unrefrigerated (shelf-stable), 
reduced oxygen packaged fishery products 
Examples of shelf-stable, reduced oxygen 
packaged fishery products are dried fish, 
acidified fish, canned fish, and salted fish. 
Because these products are marketed without 
refrigeration, either (1) the spores of C. 
botulinum types A, B, E, and F should be 
destroyed after the product is placed in the 
finished product container (covered by the 
LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 113) or (2) a barrier, 
or combination of barriers, should be in place 
that will prevent growth and toxin formation 
by C. botulinum types A, B, E, and F, and 
other pathogens that may be present in the 
product.  Suitable barriers include: 
•	 
•	 
•	 
•	 
Adding suf
ficient salt to produce 
a water phase salt level (i.e., the 
concentration of salt in the water 
portion of the fish flesh) of at least 
20%.  Note that this value is based on 
the maximum salt level for growth of 
S. aureus, covered in this chapter; 
Reducing the amount of moisture 
that is available for growth (water 
activity) to below 0.85 (e.g., by adding 
salt or other substances that bind the 
available water).  Note that this value 
is based on the minimum water activity 
for growth and toxin formation of S. 
aureus, covered in this chapter; 
Adding sufficient acid to reduce the pH 
to 4.6 or below. This barrier is covered 
by the Acidified Foods regulation, 21 CFR 
114, and these controls are not required 
to be included in your HACCP plan; 
Drying the product sufficiently to 
reduce the water activity to 0.85 or 
below.  Note that this value is based 
on the minimum water activity for 
growth and toxin formation of S. 
aureus, covered in Chapter 14. 
Note: A heat treatment, addition of chemical additives, or 
other treatment may be necessary to inhibit or eliminate 
spoilage organisms (e.g., mold) in shelf-stable products. 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether C. botulinum toxin formation 
is a significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that C. botulinum will 
grow and produce toxin during finished product 
storage and distribution? 
The factors that make C. botulinum toxin 
formation during finished product storage 
and distribution reasonably likely to occur 
are those that may result in the formation of 
a reduced oxygen packaging environment. 
These are discussed in the section 
“Understand the potential hazard,” under the 
heading, “Reduced oxygen packaging.” 
2.	 Can growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum that 
is reasonably likely to occur be eliminated or reduced 
to an acceptable level at this processing step? 
C. botulinum toxin formation should also 
be considered a significant hazard at any 
processing step where a preventive measure 
is, or can be, used to eliminate the hazard 
(or reduce the likelihood of its occurrence to 
an acceptable level) if it is reasonably likely 
to occur. 
Preventive measures for C. botulinum toxin 
formation during finished product distribution 
and storage are discussed in the section, 
“Understand the potential hazard,” under the 
heading, “Control of C. botulinum.” 
•	
 Intended use 
Because of the extremely toxic nature of 
C. botulinum toxin, it is unlikely that the 
significance of the hazard will be affected by the 
intended use of your product. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for C. botulinum toxin 
formation: 
1.	 Is there an acidification step (equilibrium pH 
of 4.6 or below), a drying step, an in-package 
pasteurization step, a combination of cook and 
hot-fill steps, or a retorting step (commercial 
sterility) in the process? 
a.	 
If there is, you should in most cases 
identify the acidification step, drying 
step, pasteurization step, cook and hot-
fill steps, or retorting step as the CCP(s) 
for this hazard.  Other processing steps 
where you have identified C. botulinum 
toxin formation as a significant hazard 
will then not require control and will 
not need to be identified as CCPs for 
the hazard.  However, control should 
be provided for time and temperature 
exposure during finished product 
storage and distribution of the following 
products: 
•	 
•	 
Products pasteurized in the final 
container to kill 
C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B 
and F and refrigerated to control 
the growth of C. botulinum type 
A and proteolytic types B and F 
and other pathogens that may 
be present (e.g., pasteurized 
crabmeat and pasteurized surimi); 
Products cook
ed to kill C. botulinum  
type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F, and then hot filled into 
the final container, and next 
refrigerated to control the growth 
of C. botulinum type A and 
proteolytic types B and F and other 
pathogens that may be present; 
•	 Products dried to control the 
growth of C. botulinum type E 
and non-proteolytic types B and 
F and refrigerated to control the 
growth of C. botulinum type A and 
proteolytic types B and F and other 
pathogens that may be present. 
In these cases, you should also identify 
the finished product storage step as 
a CCP for the hazard.  Control of 
refrigeration is covered in this chapter for 
C. botulinum and in Chapter 12 for other 
pathogenic bacteria. 
Additionally, some pasteurized surimi­
based products rely on a combination of 
salt and a relatively mild pasteurization 
process in the finished product container 
for the control of C. botulinum type E 
and non-proteolytic types B and F.  In 
these products, you should also identify 
the formulation step as a CCP for the 
hazard.  Guidance provided in “Control 
Strategy Example 4 - Pickling and Salting” 
may be useful in developing controls at 
this step. 
Guidance for the C. botulinum control 
strategies listed above is contained in the 
following locations: 
•	 
•	 
•	 
•	 
•	 
Control of cooking and hot-filling 
is covered in Chapters 16 and 18; 
Control of pasteurization is 
covered in Chapters 16 and 18; 
Control of drying is covered 
in Chapter 14; 
Control of acidification is 
covered in the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114; 
Control of retorting is covered in 
the LACF Regulation, 21 CFR 113. 
Note: Acidification and retorting controls for C. botulinum 
required by 21 CFRs 113 and 114 need not be included 
in your HACCP plan. 
CHA
PTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
256 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b.	 If there is no acidification step 
(equilibrium pH of 4.6 or below), drying 
step, pasteurization step, cooking and 
hot-filling, or retorting (commercial 
sterility) step in the process, then decide 
which of the following categories best 
describes your product and refer to the 
guidance below: 
•	 Smoked and smoke-flavored fish; 
•	 Fishery products in which 
refrigeration is the sole barrier 
to prevent toxin formation; 
•	 Fishery products in which freezing is 
the sole barrier to toxin formation; 
•	 Pickled fish and similar products. 
•	 
Smoked and smoke-flavored fish 
1.	 Is the water phase salt level and, when permitted, 
the nitrite level, important to the safety of the 
product? 
For all products in this category, the water 
phase salt level is critical to the safety of the 
product, and the brining, dry salting and, 
where applicable, drying steps should be 
identified as CCPs.  Nitrite, when permitted, 
allows a lower level of salt to be used. Salt 
and nitrite are the principal inhibitors to 
C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F toxin formation in these 
products.  The water phase salt level needed 
to inhibit toxin formation is partially achieved 
during brining or dry salting and is partially 
achieved during drying.  Control should be 
exercised over both operations. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1a - Brining, Dry 
Salting, and Drying).” 
2.	 Is the temperature of the heating or smoking 
process important to the safety of the product? 
For both cold-smoked and hot-smoked fish 
products, the temperature of smoking is critical, 
and the smoking step should be identified as 
a CCP for this hazard.  The smoking step for 
hot-smoked fish should be sufficient to damage 
the spores and make them more susceptible to 
inhibition by salt.  The smoking step for cold-
smoked fish should not be so severe that it kills 
the natural spoilage bacteria.  These bacteria 
are necessary so that the product will spoil 
before toxin production occurs.  It is likely 
that they will also produce acid, which will 
further inhibit C. botulinum growth and toxin 
formation. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1b - Cold Smoking and 
1c - Hot Smoking).” 
3.	 Is the storage temperature important to the safety 
of the product? 
Refrigerated (not frozen) finished product 
storage is critical to the safety of all products 
in this category and should be identified as 
a CCP.  Toxin formation by C. botulinum 
type A and proteolytic types B and F is not 
inhibited by water phase salt levels below 
10%, nor by the combination of inhibitors 
present in most smoked or smoke-flavored 
fish. Bacillus cereus can grow and form 
toxin at water phase salt concentrations as 
high as 18%. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1d - Refrigerated 
Finished Product Storage).” 
In some cases, salted, smoked, or smoke-
flavored fish are received as ingredients 
for assembly into another product, such 
as a salmon paté.  In other cases, they are 
received simply for storage and further 
distribution (e.g., by a warehouse).  In either 
case, the refrigerated (not frozen) storage step 
is critical to the safety of the product and 
should be identified as a CCP.  Control is the 
same as that provided under “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1d - Refrigerated 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
257 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finished Product Storage).”  Additionally, 
receiving of these products should be 
identified as a CCP, where control can be 
exercised over the time and temperature 
during transit. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 1 - Smoking (1e - Receipt of 
Products by Secondary Processor).” 
•	 Fishery products in which refrigeration is 
the sole barrier to prevent toxin formation 
1.	 Is the storage temperature important to the safety 
of the product? 
Refrigerated finished product storage is 
critical to the safety of all products in this 
category and should be identified as a CCP. 
These products contain no barriers (other 
than refrigeration) to toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F during finished product storage and 
distribution.  These types of C. botulinum 
will grow at temperatures as low as 38°F 
(3.3°C), necessitating particularly stringent 
temperature control. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 2 - Refrigeration With TTI (2d ­
Refrigerated Finished Product Storage).” 
In some cases, these products are received as 
ingredients for assembly into another product. 
In other cases, they are received simply for 
storage and further distribution (e.g., by a 
warehouse).  In either case, the refrigerated 
storage step is critical to the safety of the 
product and should be identified as a CCP. 
Control is the same as that provided under 
“Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigeration 
With a TTI (2d - Refrigerated Finished 
Product Storage).”  Additionally, receiving of 
these products should be identified as a CCP, 
where control can be exercised over the time 
and temperature during transit. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 2 - Refrigeration With a TTI (2e ­
Receipt of Product by Secondary Processor).” 
As previously noted, maintenance of 
temperatures below 38°F (3.3°C) after the 
product leaves your control and enters the 
distribution system cannot normally be 
ensured.  The use of a TTI on the smallest 
unit of packaging (i.e., the unit of packaging 
that will not be distributed any further, 
usually consumer or end-user package) may 
be an appropriate means of overcoming these 
problems in the distribution system.  When 
TTIs are used in this manner, their receipt, 
storage, and application and activation should 
be identified as CCPs. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to as “Control Strategy Example 2 ­
Refrigeration With TTI (2a - Unactivated TTI 
Receipt, 2b - Unactivated TTI Storage, and 2c 
- Application and Activation of TTI).” 
•	 Fishery products in which freezing is the 
sole barrier to toxin formation 
1.	  Is the storage temperature important to the safety 
of the product? 
Frozen finished product storage is critical to 
the safety of all products in this category. 
These products contain no barriers (other 
than freezing) to toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F during finished product storage and 
distribution.  As previously noted, because 
these products may appear to the retailer, 
consumer, or end user to be intended to be 
refrigerated, rather than frozen, labeling to 
ensure that they are held frozen throughout 
distribution is critical to their safety and 
should be identified as a CCP. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 3 - Frozen With Labeling.” 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
258 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Pickled and salted fish and similar products 
1.	 Is the water phase salt level, water activity, and/ 
or pH level important to the safety of the product? 
For all products in this category, the water 
phase salt level, water activity, and/or pH 
level are critical to the safety of the product 
because they are the principal inhibitors to 
growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum 
type E and non-proteolytic type B and F.  The 
levels of these inhibitors needed to inhibit 
toxin formation are achieved during the 
pickling, brining, or formulation step.  Control 
should be exercised over the relevant step. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 4 - Pickling and Salting (4a -
Brining, Pickling, Salting, and Formulation).” 
2.	 Is the storage temperature important to the safety 
of the product? 
Unless pickling, brining, or formulation results 
in a water phase salt level of at least 20% 
(note that this value is based on the maximum 
salt concentration for growth of S. aureus), a 
pH of 4.6 or below, or a water activity of 0.85 
or below (note that this value is based on 
the minimum water activity for growth of S. 
aureus), refrigerated finished product storage 
is critical to ensure the safety of the product 
and should be identified as a CCP. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 4 - Pickling and Salting (4b ­
Refrigerated Finished Product Storage).” 
In some cases, pickled fish or similar 
products are received as ingredients 
for assembly into another product.  In 
other cases, they are received simply for 
storage and further distribution (e.g., by a 
warehouse).  In either case, the refrigerated 
storage step is critical to the safety of the 
product and should be identified as a CCP. 
Control is the same as that provided under 
“Control Strategy Example 4 - Pickling and 
Salting (4b - Refrigerated Finished Product 
Storage).”  Additionally, receiving of these 
products should be identified as a CCP, 
where control can be exercised over time and 
temperature during transit. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 4 - Pickling and Salting (4c - Receipt 
of Product by Secondary Processor).” 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides four control 
strategies for C. botulinum toxin formation.  You 
may select a control strategy that is different from 
those which are suggested, provided it complies 
with the requirements of the applicable food 
safety laws and regulations. Control strategies 
contain several elements that may need to be 
used in combination to result in an effective 
control program. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Smoking  
Refrigeration with TTI  
Frozen with labeling  
Pickling and salting  
•	
 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - SMOKING 
This control strategy should include the following 
elements, as appropriate: 
a.	 Brining, dry salting, and drying; 
b.	 Cold smoking; 
c.	 Hot smoking; 
d.	 Refrigerated finished product storage; 
e.	 Receipt of products by secondary 
processor.
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1A. BRINING, DRY SALTING, AND DRYING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The minimum or maximum values for the 
cri
tical factors of the brining, dry salting, 
and/or drying processes established by a 
scientific study.  The critical factors are those 
that are necessary to ensure that the finished 
product has not less than 3.5% wps or, where 
permitted, the combination of 3% wps and 
not less than 100 ppm nitrite.  The critical 
factors may include:  brine strength; brine to 
fish ratio; brining time; brining temperature; 
thickness, texture, fat content, quality, and 
species of fish; drying time; input/output air 
temperature, humidity, and velocity; smoke 
density; and drier loading. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  
»	  
»	  
What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The critical factors of the established brining, 
dry s
alting, and/or drying processes. These 
may include:  brine strength; brine to fish 
ratio; brining time; brining temperature; 
thickness, texture, fat content, quality, and 
species of fish; drying time; input/output air 
temperature, humidity, and velocity; smoke 
density; and drier loading; 
OR 
•	 The wa
ter phase salt and, where appropriate, 
nitrite level of the finished product. 
How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For monitoring critical factors: 
°  Monitor brine strength with a 
salinometer;
 
AND
 
Monitor brine time with a clock;
° 
AND
 
Monitor brine temperature using:
 ° 
•	 A temperature-indicating device 
(e.g.,
 a thermometer); 
OR 
•	 Monitor brine temperature at 
the start of the brining process 
with a temper
ature- indicating 
device (e.g., a thermometer), 
and then monitor ambient air 
temperature using a continuous 
temperature-recording device 
(e.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND
 
Monitor the drying time and the input/
 
° 
output air temperature (as specified 
by the study) using a continuous 
temperature-recording device (e.g., a 
recording thermometer); 
AND 
Monitor all other critical factors specified 
° 
by the study with equipment appropriate 
for the measurement; 
OR 
•	 Col
lect a representative sample of the 
finished product and conduct water phase 
salt analysis and, when appropriate, nitrite 
analysis. 
How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
F or brine strength: 
At least at the start of the brining 
process;
 
AND
 
F
or brine time: 
Once per batch;
AND 
F
or manual brine temperature monitoring:  
At the start of the brining process and at 
least e
very 2 hours thereafter;
 
AND
 
For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Continuous monitoring by the device 
itself
, with a visual check of the recorded 
data at least once per batch; 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
260 
 
 
 
AND 
•	 F
or brine to fish ratio: 
°  At the start of the brining process; 
AND 
•	 For time requirements of the drying process: 
Each batch;° 
AND 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  As often as necessary to maintain control; 
OR 
•	 For water phase salt and, when appropriate, 
nitrite:  
°  Each lot or batch of finished product. 
Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
F or continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself
.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure 
that the critical limits have been met 
consistently, may be performed by any 
person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls; 
OR 
For other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
C hill and hold the product until its safety can 
be evaluated; 
OR 
Reprocess the product; 
that is not hermetically sealed, or an LACF, 
or a frozen product); 
OR 
Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., packaging 
OR 
•	 
•	 
»	  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 
•	 
•	 
Destroy the product; 
OR 
D
ivert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Adjust the salt and/or nitrite concentration in 
the brine; 
OR 
•	 Adju
st the air velocity or input air 
temperature to the drying chamber; 
OR 
•	 Exte
nd the drying process to compensate 
for a reduced air velocity or temperature or 
elevated humidity; 
OR 
•	 Adju
st the brine strength or brine to fish ratio; 
OR 
 Coo
l the brine; •	
OR 
Move some or all of the product to another 
drying chamber; 
•	 
OR 
 Make repairs or adjustments to the drying 
chamber as necessary. 
•	
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Printouts, charts, or readings from continuous 
t
emperature-recording devices; 
AND 
Record of visual checks of recorded data; •	 
AND 
Appropriate records (e.g., processing record  
showing the results of the brine strength 
and temperature, brine to fish ratio, size 
•	 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
261 
  
 
an
d species of fish, and time of brining) as 
necessary to document the monitoring of 
the critical factors of the brining, dry salting, 
and/or drying process, as established by a 
study; 
OR 
Results of the finished product water phase 
salt determination and, when appropriate, 
nitrite determination. 
•	 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Process validation study (except where water 
p
hase salt analysis and, where appropriate, 
nitrite analysis of the finished product are the 
monitoring procedure): 
° 
applicable, nitrite levels should be 
taken into consideration in the process 
establishment.  A record of the process 
establishment should be maintained; 
The adequacy of the brining, dry 
salting, and drying processes should 
be established by a scientific study.  It 
should be designed to consistently 
achieve a water phase salt level of 
3.5% or 3% with not less than 100 ppm 
nitrite.  Expert knowledge of salting and/ 
or drying processes may be required 
to establish such a process.  Such 
knowledge can be obtained by education 
or experience, or both.  Process 
validation study for establishment of 
brining, dry salting, and drying processes 
may require access to adequate facilities 
and the application of recognized 
methods.   The drying equipment should 
be designed, operated, and maintained to 
deliver the established drying process to 
every unit of product.  In some instances,  
brining, dry salting, and/or drying studies 
may be required to establish minimum 
processes.  In other instances, existing 
literature, which establishes minimum 
processes or adequacy of equipment,  
is available.  Characteristics of the 
process, product, and/or equipment 
that affect the ability of the established 
minimum salting, dry salting, and drying 
process to deliver the desired finished 
product water phase salt and, where 
AND 
Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature-recording  
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected.  This check can be 
accomplished by: 
•	 
°  
°  
°  
°  
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the de
vice will be used 
at or near the boiling point.  Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if 
the de
vice will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading 
on the de
vice with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a thermometer traceable to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
air temperature, brine temperature,  
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
AND 
 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
•	
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
262 
 
 
 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
or temperature recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer.  Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions  
of use of the device.  Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration or 
the need to replace the device (perhaps with 
a more durable device).  Devices subjected 
to high temperatures for extended periods of 
time may require more frequent calibration.  
Calibration should be performed at a 
minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Perform other calibration procedures as 
necessary to ensure the accuracy of the 
monitoring instruments; 
AND 
•	 Do finished product sampling and analysis 
to determine water phase salt and, where 
appropriate, nitrite analysis at least once 
every 3 months (except where such testing is 
performed as part of monitoring); 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
1B. COLD SMOKING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The smoker temperature must not exceed 
9
0°F (32.2°C). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	  
»	  
»	  
»	  
What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The smoker temperature. 
How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Measure ambient smoker chamber 
t
emperature using a continuous temperature- 
recording device (e.g., a recording 
thermometer). 
How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Continuous monitoring by the device itself, 
w
ith a visual check of the recorded data at 
least once per batch. 
Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Monitoring is performed by the device itself. 
T
he visual check of the data generated 
by the device, to ensure that the critical 
limits have been met consistently, may 
be performed by any person who has an 
understanding of the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 C hill and hold the product until its safety can 
be evaluated; 
OR 
•	 Di
vert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., packaging 
that is not hermetically sealed, or an LACF, 
or a frozen product); 
OR 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
263 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
•	 
•	 
De
stroy the product; 
OR 
D
iv
ert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the smoking 
c
hamber; 
AND/OR 
•	 Mo
ve some or all of the product to another 
smoking chamber. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Printouts, charts, or readings from continuous 
te
mperature-recording devices; 
AND 
•	 Rec
ord of visual checks of recorded data. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a r
ecording thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify that 
the factory calibration has not been affected. 
This check can be accomplished by: 
°  
°  
°  
°  
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling w
ater 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point.
 Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temper
ature; 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a kno
wn  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions 
that are similar to ho
w it will be used (e.g., 
air temperature) within the temperature 
range at which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 
•	 
•	 
Once in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
Ca
librate the temperature-recording device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.   
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
264 
 
 
 
 
 
1C. HOT SMOKING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The internal temperature of the fish must 
be m
aintained at or above 145°F (62.8°C) 
throughout the fish for at least 30 minutes. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The internal temperature at the thickest 
por
tion of three of the largest fish in the 
smoking chamber. 
How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Use a continuous temperature-recording 
de
vice (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
equipped with three temperature-sensing 
probes. 
How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Continuous monitoring by the device itself, 
wi
th visual check of the recorded data at 
least once per batch. 
Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Monitoring is performed by the device itself. 
Th
e visual check of the data generated 
by the device, to ensure that the critical 
limits have been met consistently, may 
be performed by any person who has an 
understanding of the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
C hill and hold the product until its safety can 
be evaluated; 
OR 
Reprocess the product; 
OR 
Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., packaging 
that is not hermetically sealed, or a LACF, or 
a frozen product); 
OR 
•	 
•	 
»	  •	 
•	 
»	  
»	  
»	  
•	 
•	 
•	 
Destroy the product; 
OR 
D
ivert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
M ake repairs or adjustments to the heating 
chamber; 
OR 
Move some or all of the product to another 
heating chamber. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Printouts, charts, or readings from continuous 
t
emperature-recording devices; 
AND 
•	 Re
cord of visual checks of recorded data. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a r
ecording thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify 
that the factory calibration has not been 
affected.  This check can be accomplished 
by: 
°  
°  
°  
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the de
vice will be used 
at or near the boiling point.  Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
OR 
Doing a combination of the above if 
the de
vice will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
265 
 
°  
•	 
•	 
•	 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
product internal temperature) within the  
temperature range at which it will be used;  
AND 
O
nce in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
Calibrate the temperature-recording device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
AND 
Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
1D. REFRIGERATED FINISHED PRODUCT STORAGE 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
»	  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
»	  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
F or refrigerated (not frozen) finished product 
storage:
  
The product is held at a cooler 
temper
ature of 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below.  Note that allowance for routine 
refrigeration defrost cycles may be 
necessary.  Also note that you may 
choose to set a critical limit that specifies 
a time and temperature of exposure to 
temperatures above 40°F (4.4°C); 
OR 
For finished product stored under ice: 
The product is completely and 
continuously sur
rounded by ice 
throughout the storage time. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
What Will Be Monitored? 
F or refrigerated finished product storage: 
The temperature of the cooler;  
OR 
F
or finished product storage under ice: 
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
produc
t. 
How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
F or refrigerated finished product storage: 
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
de
vice (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
OR 
For finished product storage under ice: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice in a representativ
e 
number of containers (e.g., cartons and 
totes) from throughout the cooler. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
266 
 
 
»	  
•	 °  
°  
°  
•	 •	 
°  °  
»	  
•	 °  
°  
•	 
°  
•	 °  
°  •	 
°  
•	 
•	 
•	 
•	 •	 
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
F or continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Continuous monitoring by the device 
itself
, with a visual check of the recorded 
data at least once per day; 
OR 
For finished product storage under ice: 
Sufficient frequency to ensure control.  
Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
F or continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself
.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure 
that the critical limits have been met 
consistently, may be performed by any 
person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls; 
OR 
For other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
C hill and hold the affected product until an 
evaluation of the total time and temperature 
exposure is performed; 
OR 
Destroy the product; 
OR 
Divert the product to a non-food use. 
OR 
Move some or all of the product in the 
malfunc
tioning cooler to another cooler;
 
OR
 
Freeze the product;
 
AND 
A
ddress the root cause: 
Make repairs or adjustments to the 
malfunc
tioning cooler; 
OR 
Make adjustments to the ice application 
oper
ations. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
P revent further deterioration: 
Add ice to the product; 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
F or refrigerated finished product storage: 
Printouts, charts, or readings from 
continuous temper
ature-recording 
devices;
 
AND
 
Record of visual checks of recorded data;
 
OR 
F
or finished product storage under ice: 
Results of ice checks: 
The number of containers e
xamined 
and the sufficiency of ice for each; 
AND 
The approximate number of 
containers in the cooler.  
Establish Verification Procedures. 
B efore a temperature-recording device (e.g.,  
a recording thermometer) is put into service,  
check the accuracy of the device to verify that  
the factory calibration has not been affected.   
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the de
vice will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
267 
 
°  
•	 
•	 
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 
•	 
°  
°  
•	 
•	 
Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
air temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
AND 
Once in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
Calibrate the temperature-recording device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
When visual checks of ice are used, 
periodically measure internal temperatures 
of fish to ensure that the ice is sufficient 
to maintain product temperatures at 40°F 
(4.4°C) or less; 
AND 
Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
1E.	 RECEIPT OF PRODUCTS BY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Set Critical Limits. 
F or fish or fishery products delivered 
refrigerated (not frozen): 
All lots received are accompanied by 
tr
ansportation records that show that 
the product was held at or below 40°F 
(4.4°C) throughout transit.  Note that 
allowance for routine refrigeration 
defrost cycles may be necessary; 
OR 
For products delivered under ice: 
Product is completely surrounded by ice 
at the time of deliv
ery; 
OR
 
For products delivered under chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs: 
There is an adequate quantity of cooling
media that remain fro
zen to have 
maintained product at 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below throughout transit;  
AND 
The internal temperature of the product 
at the time of deliv
ery is 40°F (4.4°C) or 
below; 
OR 
For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time (including all 
time outside a controlled temperature 
environment) of 4 hours or less (optional 
control strategy):  
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
268 
°  
°  »  
•	 
°  
»  
•	 
°  •	 
°  
°  
•	 •	 
°  
°  
•	 
°  
°  
°  
•	 •	 
°  °  
°  
Time of transit does not exceed 4 hours; 
AND 
Temperature of the product at the time 
of deliv
ery does not exceed 40°F (4.4°C). 
Note: Processors receiving product with transit times of 4 hours or less  
may elect to use one of the controls described for longer transit times. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
What Will Be Monitored? 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) at the 
time of delivery. 
For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen):  
The internal temperature of the product 
throughout tr
ansportation;  
OR 
The temperature within the truck or 
other car
rier throughout transportation; 
OR 
For products delivered under ice: 
The adequacy of ice surrounding the 
produc
t at the time of delivery;
 
OR
 
For products held under chemical cooling 
media, such as gel packs: 
The quantity and frozen status of cooling 
media at the time of deliv
ery; 
AND 
The internal temperature of a 
representativ
e number of product 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) at 
time of delivery; 
OR 
For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time of 4 hours or less: 
The date and time fish were removed 
from a controlled temper
ature 
environment before shipment and the 
date and time delivered; 
AND 
The internal temperature of a 
representativ
e number of product 
How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
F or products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen):  
Use a continuous temperature-recording 
de
vice (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
for internal product temperature or 
ambient air temperature monitoring 
during transit;  
OR 
For products delivered under ice: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy of ice in a representativ
e 
number of containers (e.g., cartons and 
totes) from throughout the shipment, at 
delivery; 
OR 
For products delivered under chemical 
cooling media, such as gel packs: 
Make visual observations of the 
adequacy and fro
zen state of the cooling 
media in a representative number of 
containers (e.g., cartons and totes) from 
throughout the shipment, at delivery; 
AND 
Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a ther
mometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representative 
number of product containers from 
throughout the shipment, at delivery; 
OR 
For products delivered refrigerated (not 
frozen) with a transit time of 4 hours or less: 
Review carrier records to determine 
the date and time the produc
t was 
removed from a controlled temperature 
environment before shipment and the 
date and time delivered; 
AND 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
269 
°  Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer) to determine internal 
product temperatures in a representative 
number of product containers (e.g.,  
cartons and totes) randomly selected 
from throughout the shipment, at 
delivery.  Measure a minimum of 12 
product containers, unless there are 
fewer than 12 product containers in a 
lot, in which case measure all of the 
containers.  Lots that show a high level 
of temperature variability may require a 
larger sample size. 
How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Each lot received. 
Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
F or continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself
.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure 
that the critical limits have been met 
consistently, may be performed by any 
person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls; 
OR 
For other checks: 
Any person who has an understanding of 
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
C hill and hold the affected product until an 
evaluation of the total time and temperature 
exposure is performed; 
OR 
Reject the lot. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 
•	 
°  
•	 
»	  
•	 
»	  
•	 °  
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 
•	 
°  
•	 
°  
•	 •	 
•	 •	 
•	 
D iscontinue use of the supplier or carrier 
until evidence is obtained that the identified 
transportation-handling practices have been 
improved.  
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
R eceiving records showing: 
Results of continuous temperature 
monitoring: 
Printouts,
 charts, or readings 
from continuous temperature-
recording devices; 
AND 
Visual check of recorded data;
 
OR
 
Results of ice checks, including:
 
The number of containers e
xamined 
and the sufficiency of ice for each; 
AND 
The number of containers in the lot;
 
OR
 
Results of the chemical media checks,
  
including: 
The number of containers 
e
xamined and the frozen status 
of the media for each; 
AND 
The number of containers in the lot;  
AND/OR 
Results of internal product temperature 
monitoring,
 including: 
The number of containers 
examined and the internal 
temperatures observed for each; 
AND 
The number of containers in the lot; 
AND 
Date and time fish were initially 
removed from a controlled 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
270 
 
temper
ature environment 
and date and time fish were 
delivered, when applicable. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)), if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions 
that are similar to how it will be used 
(e.g., product internal temperature) 
within the temperature range at which it 
will be used; 
AND 
•	 
Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the 
beginning of operations.  Less frequent 
accuracy checks may be appropriate if 
they are recommended by the instrument 
manufacturer and the history of use of 
the instrument in your facility has shown 
that the instrument consistently remains 
accurate for a longer period of time. 
  In 
addition to checking that the device is 
accurate by one of the methods described 
above, this process should include a 
visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that 
it is operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Check the accuracy of temperature-recording 
devices that are used for monitoring transit 
conditions, for all new suppliers and at 
least quarterly for each supplier thereafter.  
Additional checks may be warranted based 
on observations at receipt (e.g., refrigeration 
units appear to be in poor repair or readings 
appear to be erroneous).  The accuracy of 
the device can be checked by comparing 
the temperature reading on the device with 
the reading on a known accurate reference 
device (e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) 
under conditions that are similar to how it 
will be used (e.g., air temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 When visual checks of ice are used, 
periodically measure internal temperatures 
of fish to ensure that the ice or is sufficient 
to maintain product temperatures at 40°F 
(4.4°C) or less;  
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
271 
 
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
272 
TABLE 13-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - SMOKING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Smoking.”  This example illustrates how a processor of vacuum-packaged hot-
smoked salmon can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, growth of other pathogenic bacteria, survival of other pathogenic bacteria through the 
cook step, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Brining C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation in 
the finished
product 
Minimum
brining time:
6 hours
Maximum brine
temperature: 40ºF 
Start time 
and end time
of the brining
process
Brine
temperature 
Clock
Dial
thermometer 
Every batch
Every 2 hours 
Brine
room
employee 
Extend the 
brining
process
Hold and evaluate 
the product 
Cool the brine 
Production 
record 
Establish
a brining and
drying process 
Check the dial thermometer for 
accuracy and damage and to 
ensure that it is operational 
before putting into operation; 
check it daily, at the beginning of 
operations; and calibrate it once 
per year
Monthly calibration of the scale
Quarterly water phase salt analysis 
of the finished product
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation 
Minimum salt
concentration of 
brine at the start 
of brining: 60°
salinometer 
Salt
concentration 
of brine 
Salinometer Start of  each
brining
process 
Brine
room
employee 
Add salt Production 
record 
Minimum ratio of 
brine to fish:
2:1 
Weight of 
brine (as
determined 
by volume) 
Visual, to 
mark on the
tank 
Start of  each
brining
process 
Brine
room
employee 
Add brine Production
record 
Weight of 
fish 
Scale Each batch Remove some fish 
and reweigh 
Maximum fish
thickness 1½ in.
Note: To produce 
a minimum water 
phase salt level in 
the loin muscle of
3.5% 
Fish
thickness 
Caliper Each batch
(10 largest 
fish) 
Brine
room
employee 
Hold and evaluate 
based on finished
product water 
phase salt analysis 
Production 
record 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 13-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - SMOKING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Smoking.”  This example illustrates how a processor of vacuum-packaged hot-
smoked salmon can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, growth of other pathogenic bacteria, survival of other pathogenic bacteria through the 
cook step, and metal fragments). 
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
273 
Smoking
and
drying 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
in finished
product 
Minimum time
open vent:  2 hours 
Time of open 
vent 
Clock Each batch Smoker 
employee 
Extend the drying 
process
Hold and evaluate 
based on finished
product water 
phase salt analysis 
Production 
record 
Establish a brining and drying 
process Quarterly water phase salt 
analysis of the finished product
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation 
Heating C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation in 
the finished
product 
Internal 
temperature of fish 
held at or above 
145°F for at least 30 
minutes 
Internal 
temperature 
of fish and
time at that
temperature 
Digital data
logger with
three probes
in thickest 
fish in cold
spot of
smoking
chamber 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
at the end of
the batch 
Smoker 
employee 
Extend the 
heating
process
Make repairs or 
adjustments to the
smoking chamber  
Hold and evaluate 
the product 
Data
logger
printout 
Check the data logger for accuracy 
and damage and to ensure that
it is operational before putting 
into operation; check it daily, at 
the beginning of operations; and 
calibrate it once per year
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation 
Finished
product 
storage 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
during
finished
product 
storage 
Maximum cooler
temperature:  40°F
(based on growth 
of vegetative 
pathogens) 
Cooler air
temperature 
Digital data
logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Production 
employee 
Adjust or repair 
the cooler
Hold and evaluate 
the product based 
on time and
temperature of 
exposure 
Digital
data logger
printout 
Check the data logger for accuracy 
and damage and to ensure that
it is operational before putting 
into operation; check it daily, at 
the beginning of operations; and 
calibrate it once per year
Review monitoring, corrective 
action, and verification records 
within 1 week of preparation
*Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - 
REFRIGERATION WITH TTI 
This control strategy should include the following 
elements, as appropriate: 
a.	 Unactivated TTI receipt; 
b.	 Unactivated TTI storage; 
c.	 Application and activation of TTI; 
d.	 Refrigerated finished product storage; 
e.	 Receipt of product by secondary 
processor.
 
2A. UNACTIVATED TTI RECEIPT 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The TTI is suitable for use.  It should be 
designed to perform properly under the 
conditions that it will be used.  It should 
also be designed to produce an alert 
indicator (e.g., a color change of the device) 
at a combination of time and temperature 
exposures that will prevent the formation of 
non-proteolytic  C. botulinum toxin formation  
(e.g., consistent with the “Skinner-Larkin 
curve”); 
AND 
•	 Where transportation conditions (e.g.,  
temperature) could affect the functionality 
of the TTI, all lots of TTIs are accompanied 
by transportation records that show that they 
were held at conditions that do not result in 
loss of functionality throughout transit; 
AND 
•	 The TTI functions (i.e., produces an 
alert indicator, such as a color change of 
the device, when exposed to time and 
temperature abuse) at time of receipt. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  Performance data from the manufacturer; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions:  
°  The temperature within the truck or 
other carrier throughout transportation; 
OR 
°  Other conditions that affect the 
functionality of the TTI, where 
applicable; 
AND 
•	 For functionality at receipt: 
°  The ability of the TTI to produce an 
alert indicator, such as a color change of 
the device, when exposed to time and 
temperature abuse at time of receipt. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  Review performance data; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) 
for ambient air temperature monitoring 
during transit; 
AND 
•	 For functionality at receipt: 
°  Activate and then expose a TTI from 
the lot to ambient air temperature for 
sufficient time to determine whether 
it is functional (i.e., produces an alert 
indicator, such as a color change of the 
device). 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  The first shipment of a TTI model; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions and  
functionality at receipt:
  
°  Every shipment.
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
274 
 
  
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  Anyone with an understanding of TTI 
validation studies and of the intended 
conditions of use; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions and  
functionality at receipt:  
°  Anyone with an understanding of the 
nature of the controls.   
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reject or return the shipment. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  Discontinue use of the supplier until
documentation of validation has been 
provided; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions and  
functionality at receipt: 
°  Discontinue use of the supplier or
carrier until evidence is obtained that the 
identified production or transportation 
practices have been improved.  
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 For suitability of use: 
°  Manufacturer’s performance data; 
AND 
•	 For transportation conditions:  
°  Printouts, charts, or readings from 
continuous temperature-recording 
devices; 
AND 
°  Records of visual checks of recorded 
data;
 
AND
 
•	 For functionality at receipt:  
°  Results of a TTI challenge test (i.e.,  
whether the TTI produces an alert 
indicator, such as a color change of 
the device, when exposed to time and 
temperature abuse).  
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Check the accuracy of temperature-recording 
devices that are used for monitoring transit 
conditions, for all new suppliers and at 
least quarterly for each supplier thereafter.  
Additional checks may be warranted based 
on observations at receipt (e.g., refrigeration 
units appear to be in poor repair or readings 
appear to be erroneous).  The accuracy of 
the device can be checked by comparing 
the temperature reading on the device with 
the reading on a known accurate reference 
device (e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) 
under conditions that are similar to how it 
will be used (e.g., air temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
2B. UNACTIVATED TTI STORAGE 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The combination of storage conditions 
(e.g., temperature) that prevent loss of 
functionality throughout storage (based 
on manufacturer’s specifications). 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
275 
 
 
 
 
Establish Monitoring Procedures.	 Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Storage air temperature, where temperature 
affects functionality of the TTI; 
AND/OR 
•	 Other storage conditions that affect 
functionality of the TTI. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For temperature:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND/OR 
•	 For other conditions:  
°  Use instruments appropriate for the 
purpose. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For temperature:  
°  Continuous monitoring by the device 
itself, with a visual check of the recorded 
data at least once per day; 
AND/OR 
•	 For other conditions:  
°  With sufficient frequency to ensure 
control. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 With continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
°  Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure 
that the critical limits have been met 
consistently, may be performed by any 
person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls; 
AND 
•	 For other checks: 
°  Any person who has an understanding of 
the nature of the controls. 
Take the following corrective action to a TTI involved in a  
critical limit deviation: 
•	 Destroy the lot of TTIs. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the 
malfunctioning cooler; 
AND/OR 
•	 Make other repairs or adjustment appropriate 
for the condition.  
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 For refrigerated storage:  
°  Printouts, charts, or readings from 
continuous temperature-recording 
devices;
 
AND
 
°  Record of visual checks of recorded data;
 
AND/OR 
•	 Storage record showing the results of 
monitoring of other conditions. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g.,  
a recording thermometer) is put into service,  
check the accuracy of the device to verify that  
the factory calibration has not been affected.   
This check can be accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading on  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
air temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
276 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-recording device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Perform other instrument calibration, as 
appropriate; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
2C. APPLICATION AND ACTIVATION OF TTI 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 Each consumer package has an activated 
TTI. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Packages for the presence of an activated 
TTI. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual examination. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Representative number of packages from 
each lot of product. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Hold the lot below 38°F (3.3°C) until TTIs 
are applied and activated. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Identify and correct the cause of the TTI 
application or activation deficiency. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Packaging control record that shows the 
results of the TTI checks. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
277 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2D. REFRIGERATED FINISHED PRODUCT STORAGE 
Follow the guidance for “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1d - Refrigerated Finished 
Product Storage),” except that the where the 
critical limits list 40ºF (4.4ºC), they should list 
38°F (3.3°C). 
2E. RECEIPT OF PRODUCTS BY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Follow the guidance for “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1e - Receipt of Products 
by Secondary Processor),” except that the where 
the critical limits list 40ºF (4.4ºC), they should list 
38°F (3.3°C). 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
278 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
279 
TABLE 13-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATION WITH TTI
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigeration With TTI.”  This example illustrates how a processor of refrigerated,
vacuum-packaged, raw fish fillets can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. Botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, growth of other pathogenic bacteria, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receipt of 
TTI 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation in 
the finished
product 
TTI is 
suitable for use 
Performance 
data from the
manufacturer 
Review of 
performance 
data 
First
shipment of a
TTI model 
Quality
assurance 
supervisor 
Reject the 
shipment
Discontinue use of the
supplier until appropriate
validation 
documentation
is provided 
Manufacturer’s 
performance 
data 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action  records
within 1 week 
of preparation 
All lots received 
are
accompanied
by truck 
records
that show 
temperature 
was maintained 
at or below 
40°F 
Truck 
temperature 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
review and 
evaluation of 
temperature- 
monitoring
records for each 
shipment 
Receiving 
employee 
Discontinue use of the
supplier or carrier until 
evidence is obtained 
that the identifi ed 
transportation- handling 
practices have been 
improved
Reject the 
shipment 
Receiving 
record 
Check the data
logger for all 
new suppliers 
and for all 
suppliers at
least quarterly 
thereafter
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action  records
within 1 week 
of preparation 
The TTI 
functions 
at receipt 
The ability
of the TTI to 
change color
when exposed 
to room air
temperature 
Expose a TTI 
from the lot
to room air
temperature for 
sufficient time 
to determine 
whether it
changes color 
Every 
shipment 
Quality
assurance 
staff 
Discontinue use of the
supplier or carrier until 
evidence is obtained that 
the identifi ed production 
or transportation- 
handling practices have 
been improved 
TTI 
challenge
record 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action  records
within 1 week 
of preparation 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 13-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATION WITH TTI
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigeration With TTI.”  This example illustrates how a processor of refrigerated,
vacuum-packaged, raw fish fillets can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. Botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, growth of other pathogenic bacteria, and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
280 
TTI 
storage 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation in 
the finished
product 
Cooler
maintained
below 38°F 
Cooler
temperature 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Quality
assurance 
staff 
Repair or adjust cooler
Destroy the lot of TTIs 
Data
logger printout 
Check the
data logger for 
accuracy and 
damage and to
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
TTI 
attachment
and
activation 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation in 
the finished
product 
Each
package has an
activated TTI 
Packages for 
the presence
of an
activated TTI 
Visual 
examination 
Representative 
number of
packages from
each lot of
product 
Production 
employee 
Hold lot below 38°F, and 
apply and activate TTIs
Identify and correct the 
cause of TTI application 
deviation 
Packaging 
control record 
Review 
monitoring,
and corrective 
action and 
verification  
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 13-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - REFRIGERATION WITH TTI
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Refrigeration With TTI.”  This example illustrates how a processor of refrigerated,
vacuum-packaged, raw fish fillets can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. Botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, growth of other pathogenic bacteria, and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
281 
Finished
product 
storage 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
during
finished
product 
storage 
Maximum
cooler
temperature 
38°F 
Cooler air
temperature 
Digital data
logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Production 
employee 
Adjust or repair cooler 
Hold and
evaluate the product 
based on time and
temperature of exposure 
Digital logger
printout 
Check the
data logger for 
accuracy and 
damage and to
ensure that it
is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
*Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process. 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - FROZEN WITH 
LABELING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All finished product labels must contain a 
“keep frozen” statement (e.g., “Important, 
keep frozen until used, thaw under 
refrigeration immediately before use”). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Finished product labels for the presence of a 
“keep frozen” statement. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual examination. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Representative number of packages from 
each lot of product. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Segregate and relabel any improperly labeled 
product. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Segregate and return or destroy any label 
stock or pre-labeled packaging stock that 
does not contain the proper statement; 
AND 
•	 Determine and correct the cause of improper 
labels. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record of labeling checks. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
282 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
283 
TABLE 13-3
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 - FROZEN WITH LABELING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3 - Frozen With Labeling.”  This example illustrates how a processor of frozen,
vacuum-packaged, raw fish fillets can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. Botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receipt of 
labeling 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
during
finished
product 
storage 
All finished
product labels 
must contain a
“keep 
frozen”
statement 
Finished
product 
labels for the 
presence of a
“keep frozen”
statement 
Visual 
examination 
Representative 
number of
packages from
each lot of
product 
Receiving 
employee 
Segregate and
relabel any
improperly
labeled product
Segregate and
destroy any 
label stock
that does not
contain the
proper
statement
Determine 
and correct 
the cause of
improper labels 
Label receiving
record 
Review 
monitoring and
correction 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	
 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - PICKLING 
AND SALTING 
This control strategy should include the following 
elements, as appropriate: 
a.	 Brining, pickling, salting, and 
formulation;
 
b.	 Refrigerated finished product storage; 
c.	 Receipt of Product by secondary 
processor.
 
4A. BRINING, PICKLING, SALTING, AND 
FORMULATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The minimum or maximum values for 
the critical factors of the brining, pickling, 
or formulation process established by a 
scientific study.  The critical factors are those 
that are necessary to ensure that the finished 
product has: 
For refrigerated, reduced oxygen-packaged  
fishery products:  
°  A water phase salt level of at least 5%; 
OR
 
°  A pH of 5.0 or below; 
OR
 
°  A water activity of below 0.97; 
OR 
°  A water phase salt level of at least 
2.4% in surimi-based products, when 
combined with a pasteurization process 
in the finished product container 
of 185°F (85°C) for 15 minutes 
(pasteurization controls are covered in 
Chapter 16); 
OR
 
°  A combination of water phase salt,
  
pH, and/or water activity that, when 
combined, have been demonstrated to 
prevent the growth of C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F. 
For unrefrigerated (shelf-stable), reduced oxygen-
packaged products: 
°  A water phase salt level of at least 20% 
(based on the maximum salt level for 
growth of S. aureus); 
OR
 
°  A pH of 4.6 or below; 
OR 
°  A water activity of 0.85 or below (based 
on the minimum water activity for 
growth and toxin formation of S. aureus). 
A heat treatment, addition of chemical additives,  
or other treatment may be necessary to inhibit or  
eliminate spoilage organisms (e.g., mold) in shelf-
stable products. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The critical factors of the established 
pickling, brining, or formulation process. 
These may include:  brine and acid strength; 
brine or acid to fish ratio; brining and 
pickling time; brine and acid temperature; 
thickness, texture, fat content, quality, and 
species of fish; 
OR 
•	 The water phase salt, pH, and/or water 
activity of the finished product. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For brine strength: 
°  Use a salinometer;
AND 
•	 For acid strength: 
°  Use a pH meter or titrate for acid 
concentration;
 
AND
 
•	 For brine/acid temperature: 
°  Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer);
 
AND
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
284 
 
 
 
 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°	  Use equipment appropriate for the 
measurement;
 
OR
 
•	 For water phase salt, pH, and/or water 
activity:  
°  Collect a representative sample of the 
finished product, and conduct water 
phase salt, pH, and/or water activity 
analysis, as appropriate.  
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For brine and acid strength: 
°  At the start of each brining, pickling, and 
formulation process;
 
AND
 
•	 For brine and acid temperature: 
°  At the start of each brining, pickling, and 
formulation process and at least every 2 
hours thereafter; 
AND 
•	 For brine or acid to fish ratio: 
°  At the start of each brining, pickling, and 
formulation process;
 
AND
 
•	 For other critical factors specified by the study:  
°  As often as necessary to maintain control; 
OR 
•	 Water phase salt, pH, and/or water activity 
analysis should be determined for each batch 
of finished product. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For water activity: 
°  Any person with sufficient training to 
perform the analysis;
 
OR
 
•	 For other checks: 
°  Any person with an understanding of the
nature of the controls. 
•	 Chill and hold the product until it can be 
evaluated based on its water phase salt, pH, 
and/or water activity level; 
OR 
•	 Reprocess the product (if reprocessing does 
not jeopardize the safety of the product); 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., packaging 
that is not hermetically sealed, or a LACF,  or 
a frozen product); 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a non-food use; 
OR 
•	 Destroy the product.  
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Adjust the brine or acid strength or brine or 
acid to fish ratio; 
OR 
•	 Extend the brining or pickling time to 
compensate for an improper brine or acid 
temperature. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Records, as necessary, to document the 
monitoring of the critical factors of the 
brining or pickling process, as established 
by a study (e.g., a processing record showing 
the results of the brine or acid strength 
and temperature, brine or acid to fish ratio, 
size and species of fish, time of brining or 
pickling);  
OR 
•	 Record of determinations of the finished 
product water phase salt, pH, or water activity. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
285 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Process validation study (except where water 
phase salt, pH, or water activity analysis 
of the finished product is the monitoring 
procedure):   
°  The adequacy of the pickling, brining,  
and formulation process steps should 
be established by a scientific study.  For 
refrigerated, reduced oxygen-packaged 
products, it should be designed to 
consistently achieve:  a water phase salt 
level of at least 5%; a pH of 5.0 or below; 
a water activity of below 0.97; a water 
phase salt level of at least 2.4% in surimi­
based products, when combined with 
a pasteurization process in the finished 
product container of 185°F (85°C) for 
at least 15 minutes; or a combination 
of salt, pH, and/or water activity that,  
when combined, prevent the growth of 
C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F (established by a scientific 
study).  For unrefrigerated (shelf-stable),  
reduced oxygen-packaged products,  
it should be designed to consistently 
achieve:  a water phase salt level of 
at least 20% (based on the maximum 
water phase salt level for the growth of 
S. aureus); a pH of 4.6 or below; or a 
water activity of 0.85 or below (based 
on the minimum water activity for the 
growth of S. aureus).  Expert knowledge 
of pickling, brining, and formulation 
processes may be required to establish 
such a process.  Such knowledge can be 
obtained by education or experience, or 
both.  Establishment of pickling, brining,  
and formulation processes may require 
access to adequate facilities and the 
application of recognized methods. In 
some instances, pickling, brining, and 
formulation studies may be required to 
establish minimum processes.  In other 
instances, existing literature, which 
establishes minimum processes, is 
available.  Characteristics of the process 
and/or product that affect the ability 
of the established minimum pickling,  
brining, and formulation process 
should be taken into consideration in 
the process establishment. A record of 
the process establishment should be 
maintained; 
AND 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be 
used at or near the boiling point.  Note 
that the temperature should be adjusted 
to compensate for altitude, when 
necessary); 
OR 
°  Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading on 
the device with the reading on a known 
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions 
that are similar to how it will be used 
(e.g., brine temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
286 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it is 
operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Perform daily calibration of pH meters 
against standard buffers; 
AND 
•	 Perform other calibration procedures as 
necessary to ensure the accuracy of the 
monitoring instruments; 
AND 
•	 Do finished product sampling and analysis 
to determine water phase salt, pH, or water 
activity level, as appropriate, at least once 
every 3 months (except where such testing is 
performed as part of monitoring); 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
a
 ny critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
4B. REFRIGERATED FINISHED PRODUCT STORAGE 
Follow the guidance for “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1d - Refrigerated Finished 
Product Storage).” 
4C. RECEIPT OF PRODUCT BY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Follow the guidance for “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Smoking (1e - Receipt of Product by 
Secondary Processor).” 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
287 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
288 
TABLE 13-4
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 - PICKLING AND SALTING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4 - Pickling and Salting.”  This example illustrates how a pickled herring processor
can control C. botulinum toxin formation.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
C. botulinum toxin formation may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., 
histamine, environmental and chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Pickling C. botulinum 
toxin formation 
in the finished
product 
Maximum
finished
product pH in 
the loin muscle
of 5.0 
Finished
product pH in 
the loin muscle 
Collect a 
sample of the
product from 
each pickling
tank at the
end of each
pickling cycle 
and analyze for 
pH using a pH
meter 
Each
pickling
tank, each 
cycle 
Quality
control
personnel 
Continue the
pickling process
until pH meets
the critical limit 
Pickling control
record 
Daily calibration of 
the pH meter
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action,
and verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Finished
product storage 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
during
finished
product 
storage 
Maximum
cooler
temperature:  
40°F
(based on
growth of 
vegetative 
pathogens) 
Cooler air
temperature 
Time and 
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded
data once
per day 
Production 
employee 
Adjust or 
repair cooler
Hold and
evaluate the 
product based 
on time and
temperature of 
exposure 
Data logger
printout 
Check the data
logger for accuracy 
and damage and
to ensure that
it is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it daily, at 
the beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action,
and verification 
records within 1
week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Association of Food and Drug Officials. 2005. 
Cured, salted, & smoked fish establishments 
good manufacturing practices, including 
Listeria Control Manual. Association of Food 
and Drug Officials, York, PA. 
•	 Baird-Parker, A. C., and B. Freame. 1967. 
Combined effect of water activity, pH and 
temperature on the growth of Clostridium 
botulinum from spore and vegetative cell 
inocula. J. Appl. Bact. 30:420-429. 
•	 Betts, G. D., and J. E. Getts. 1995. Growth 
and heat resistance of psychotropic 
Clostridium botulinum in relation to ‘sous 
vide’ products. Food Control 6:57-63. 
•	 Boyd, J. W., and B. A. Southcott. 1971. Effects 
of sodium chloride on outgrowth and toxin 
production of Clostridium botulinum type 
E in cod homogenates. J. Fish. Res. Bd. 
Canada. 28:1071-1075. 
•	 Brody, A. L. (ed.). 1989. Controlled/modified 
atmosphere/vacuum packaging of foods. 
Food and Nutrition Press, Inc., Trumbull, CT. 
•	 Crisan, E.V., and A. Sands. 1975. Microflora of 
four fermented fish sauces. Appl. Microbiol. 
29(1): 106-108. 
•	 Christiansen, L. N., J. Deffner, E. M. Foster, 
and H. Sugiyama. 1968. Survival and 
outgrowth of Clostridium botulinum type 
E spores in smoked fish. Appl. Microbiol. 
16:133-137. 
•	 Daniels, R. W. 1991. Applying HACCP to 
new-generation refrigerated foods at retail 
and beyond. Food Technol. 45:122, 124. 
•	 Dufresne, I., J. P. Smith, J. N. Liu, and I. Tarte. 
2000. Effect of films of different oxygen 
transmission rate on toxin production by 
Clostridium botulinum type E in vacuum 
packaged cold and hot smoked trout fillets. J. 
Food Saf. 20:251-268. 
•	 Eklund, M. W., G. A. Pelroy, R. Paranjpye, M. 
E. Peterson, and F. M. Teeny. 1982. Inhibition 
of Clostridium botulinum types A and E 
toxin production by liquid smoke and NaCl 
in hot-process smoke-flavored fish. J. Food 
Prot. 44:935-941. 
•	 Essuman, K. M., 1992. Fermented fish in 
Africa: a study on processing marketing and 
consumption. FAO Fisheries technical paper no. 
T329. FAO, Rome, Italy. ISBN: 9251032556. 80p. 
•	 European Chilled Food Federation. 1997. 
Guidelines for good hygienic practice in the 
manufacture of chilled foods. Kettering, NN. 
•	 Farber, J. M. 1991. Microbiological aspects of 
modified atmosphere packaging technology - 
a review. J. Food Prot. 54:58-70. 
•	 Garren, D. M., M. A. Harrison, and Y. W. 
Huang. 1994. Clostridium botulinum type E 
outgrowth and toxin production in vacuum-
skin packaged shrimp. Food Microbiol. 
11:467-472. 
•	 Gould, G. W. 1999. Sous vide foods: 
conclusions of an ECFF botulinum working 
party. Food Control 10:47-51. 
•	 Graham, A. F., D. R. Mason, and M. W. 
Peck. 1996. Predictive model of the effect 
of temperature, pH and sodium chloride 
on growth from spores of non-proteolytic 
Clostridium botulinum. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
31:69-85. 
•	 Hathaway, C.L. 1993. Clostridium botulinum 
and other Clostridia that produce botulinum. 
In Clostridium botulinum Ecology and Control 
in Foods. A.H.W Hauschild and K.L. Dodds 
(eds.), Marcel Dekker, New York. 1993. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
289 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Ha
uschild, A. H. W., and R. Hilsheimer. 1979. 
Effect of salt content and pH on toxigenesis 
by Clostridium botulinum in caviar. J. Food 
Prot. 42:245-248. 
•	 Hi
lderbrand, K. S. 1992. Fish smoking 
procedures for forced convection 
smokehouses, Special Report 887. Oregon 
State Extension Service, Newport, OR. 
•	 Ka
utter, D. A., P. K. Lynt, T. Lily, and H. M. 
Solomon. 1981. Evaluation of the botulism 
hazard from nitrogen-packed sandwiches. J. 
Food Prot. 44:59-61. 
•	 Ko
rnacki, J. L., and D. A. Gabis. 1990. 
Microorganisms and Refrigeration 
Temperatures. Dairy, Food & Environ. Sanit. 
10:192-195. 
•	 Lo
ha-unchit, K. 1998. How Fish Sauce 
is Made. Kasma’s Thai Food and Travel. 
http://www.thaifoodandtravel.com/features/ 
fishsauce1.html. 
•	 Le
rke, P., and L. Farber. 1971. Heat 
pasteurization of crab and shrimp from the 
Pacific coast of the United States: public 
health aspects. J. Food Sci. 36:277-279. 
•	 Ly
on, W. J., and C. S. Reddmann. 2000. 
Bacteria associated with processed 
crawfish and potential toxin production by 
Clostridium botulinum type E in vacuum-
packaged and aerobically packaged crawfish 
tails. J. Food Prot. 63:1687-1696. 
•	 Mc
Clure, P. J., M. B. Cole, and J. P. P. M. 
Smelt. 1994. Effects of water activity and pH 
on growth of Clostridium botulinum. J. Appl. 
Bact. Symp. Suppl. 76:105S-114S. 
•	 Mo
ody, M.W., G.J. Flick, R.E. Martin, and A.L. 
Correa. 2000. Smoked, cured, and dried fish. 
In R.E. Martin, E.P. Carter, G.J. Flick, L.M. 
Davis, (eds.), Marine & Freshwater Products 
Handbook, 2000. Technomic Publishing Co. 
Lancaster, PA 
•	 Nat
ional Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1992. 
Vacuum or modified atmosphere packaging 
for refrigerated raw fishery products. 
Food Safety and Inspection Service, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC. 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/OPHS/NACMCF/past/ 
map_ fishery.htm
. 
•	 Pec
k, M. W. 1997. Clostridium botulinum and 
the safety of refrigerated processed foods 
of extended durability. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 8:186-192. 
•	 Pe
lroy, G. A, M. W. Eklund, R. N. Paranjpye, 
E. M. Suzuki, and M. E. Peterson. 1982. 
Inhibition of Clostridium botulinum types A 
and E toxin formation by sodium nitrite and 
sodium chloride in hot process (smoked) 
salmon. J. Food Prot. 45:833-841. 
•	 Pe
terson, M. E., G. A. Pelroy, R. N. Paranjpye, 
F. T. Poysky, J. S. Almond, and M. W. Eklund. 
1993. Parameters for control of Listeria 
monocytogenes in smoked fishery products: 
sodium chloride and packaging method. J. 
Food Prot. 56:938-943. 
•	 Re
ddy, N. R., A. Paradis, M. G. Roman, H. M. 
Solomon, and E. J. Rhodehamel. 1996. Toxin 
development by Clostridium botulinum in 
modified atmosphere-packaged fresh tilapia 
fillets during storage. J. Food Sci. 61:632-635. 
•	 Re
ddy, N. R., D. J. Armstrong, E. J. 
Rhodehamel, and D. A. Kautter. 1992. Shelf-
life extension and safety concerns about 
fresh fishery products packaged under 
modified atmospheres: a review. J. Food Saf. 
12:87-118. 
•	 Re
ddy, N. R., H. M. Solomon, H. Yep, M. G. 
Roman, and E. J. Rhodehamel. 1997. Shelf 
life and toxin development by Clostridium 
botulinum during storage in modified 
atmosphere-packaged fresh aquacultured 
salmon fillets. J. Food Prot. 60:1055-1063. 
•	 Re
ddy, N. R., M. G. Roman, M. Villanueva, 
H. M. Solomon, D. A. Kautter, and E. J. 
Rhodehamel. 1996. Shelf life and Clostridium 
botulinum toxin development during storage 
of modified atmosphere-packaged fresh 
catfish fillets. J. Food Sci. 62:878-884. 
•	 Ref
rigerated Foods and Microbiological 
Criteria Committee of the National Food 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Processors Association. 1988. Safety 
considerations for new generation 
refrigerated foods. Dairy Food Sanit. 8:5-7. 
•	
 R
hodehamel, E. J. 1992. FDA’s concerns with 
sous vide processing. Food Technol. 46:73­
76.Rhodehamel, E. J., H. M. Solomon, T. 
Lilly, Jr., D. A. Kautter, and J. T. Peeler. 1991. 
Incidence and heat resistance of Clostridium 
botulinum type E spores in menhaden 
surimi. J. Food Sci. 56:1562-1563, 1592. 
•	
 R
oss, T., and P. Dalgaard. 2004. Secondary 
Models - A3.1.3. Salt, water-phase salt, and 
water activity.  In R. C. McKellar and L. 
Xuewen (ed.), Modeling microbial responses 
in food. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
•	
 S
chmidt, R. V., R. V. Lechowich, and J. 
F. Folinazzo. 1961. Growth and toxin 
production by type E Clostridium botulinum 
below 40°F. J. Food Sci. 26:626-630. 
•	
 S
egner, W. P, C. F. Schmidt, and J. K. 
Boltz. 1966. Effect of sodium chloride 
and pH on the outgrowth of spores of 
type E Clostridium botulinum at optimal 
and suboptimal temperatures. Appl. 
Microbiol.14:49-54. 
•	
 S
kinner, G. E., and J. W. Larkin. 1998. 
Conservative prediction of time to 
Clostridium botulinum toxin formation for 
use with time-temperature indicators to 
ensure the safety of foods. J. Food Prot. 
61:1154-1160. 
•	
 S
obel, J., et al., 2004.Foodborne botulism 
in the United States, 1990-2000. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases. 10(9): 1606-1611. 
•	
 S
ugiyama, H., and K. S. Rutledge. 1978. Failure 
of Clostridium botulinum to grow in fresh 
mushrooms packaged in plastic film overwraps 
with holes. J. Food Prot. 41:348-350. 
•	
 U
.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1996. 
Import Alert 16-74: automatic detention of 
salt-cured uneviscerated fish. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
291 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 13: Clostridium botulinum Toxin Formation 
292
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of 
Inadequate Drying 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation 
in the finished product as a result of inadequate 
drying of fishery products can cause consumer 
illness.  The primary pathogens of concern are 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Clostridium 
botulinum (C. botulinum).  See Appendix 7 for a 
description of the public health impacts of 
these pathogens. 
•	 
Control by Drying 
Dried products are usually considered shelf stable 
and are, therefore, often stored and distributed 
unrefrigerated.  Examples of shelf-stable dried 
fish products are salmon jerky, octopus chips, 
dried shrimp, stock fish, and shark cartilage.  The 
characteristic of dried foods that makes them 
shelf stable is their low water activity (A
w).  Water 
activity is the measure of the amount of water 
in a food that is available for the growth of 
microorganisms, including pathogenic bacteria.  A 
water activity of 0.85 or below will prevent the 
growth and toxin production of all pathogenic 
bacteria, including S. aureus and C. botulinum, 
and is critical for the safety of a shelf-stable dried 
product. S. aureus grows at a lower water activity 
than other pathogenic bacteria, and should, 
therefore, be considered the target pathogen for 
drying for shelf-stable products. 
You should select a packaging material that will 
prevent rehydration of the product under the 
expected conditions of storage and distribution. 
Additionally, finished product package closures 
should be free of gross defects that could expose 
the product to moisture during storage and 
distribution.  Chapter 18 provides guidance on 
control of container closures. 
Some dried products that are reduced oxygen 
packaged (e.g., vacuum packaged, modified 
atmosphere packaged) are dried only enough 
to control growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B 
and F (i.e., types that will not form toxin with 
a water activity of below 0.97).  These dried 
products are then refrigerated to control growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type A and 
proteolytic types B and F and by other pathogenic 
bacteria that may be present in the product, 
including S. aureus. The products might have the 
appearance of a fully dried product.  Therefore, 
their packaging should include “keep refrigerated” 
labeling to ensure that temperature controls are 
applied throughout distribution. 
Distributing partially dried, reduced oxygen 
packaged products frozen also could be used 
to control these pathogens.  However, labeling 
with “keep frozen” instructions would then be 
important to ensure food safety.  More information 
on C. botulinum and reduced oxygen packaging is 
contained in Chapter 13. 
This chapter does not cover the growth of 
pathogenic bacteria, including S. aureus, which 
may occur as a result of time and temperature 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
293 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
abuse during processing, including before or 
during the drying process.  That hazard is 
covered in Chapter 12.  It also does not cover the 
control of C. botulinum type A and proteolytic 
types B and F and that of other pathogenic 
bacteria that may be present, including S. aureus, 
during refrigerated storage of reduced oxygen 
packaged, partially dried products.  That hazard 
is covered in Chapters 12 and 13, respectively. 
Controlling pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation by drying is best accomplished by: 
•	 Scientifically establishing a drying process 
that reduces the water activity to 0.85 or 
below if the product will be stored and 
distributed unrefrigerated (shelf stable).  Note 
that a heat treatment, addition of chemical 
additives, further drying, or other treatment 
may be necessary to inhibit or eliminate 
spoilage organisms, for example, mold; 
•	 Scientifically establishing a drying process 
that reduces the water activity to below 0.97 
if the product will be stored refrigerated (not 
frozen) in reduced oxygen packaging; 
•	 Designing and operating the drying 
equipment so that every unit of a product 
receives at least the established minimum 
process; 
•	 Packaging the finished product in a container 
that will prevent rehydration. 
The drying operation used in the production of 
smoked or smoke-flavored fish is not designed to 
result in a finished product water activity of 0.85 
or below.  The controls for these products are 
described in Chapter 13. 
Because spores of C. botulinum are known to be 
present in the viscera of fish, any product that 
will be preserved by salting, drying, pickling, 
or fermentation should be eviscerated prior to 
processing (see the “Compliance Policy Guide,” 
Sec. 540.650).  Without evisceration, toxin 
formation is possible during the process even 
with strict control of temperature.  Evisceration 
should be thorough and performed to minimize 
contamination of the fish flesh.  If even a portion 
of the viscera or its contents is left behind, the 
risk of toxin formation by C. botulinum remains. 
Small fish, less than 5 inches in length, that are 
processed in a manner that eliminates preformed 
toxin and prevents toxin formation and that 
reach (1) a water phase salt content of 10%, a 
value based on the control of C. botulinum type 
A and proteolytic types B and F, in refrigerated 
products; or (2) a water activity of 0.85 or below 
(note that this is a value based on the minimum 
water activity for toxin production by S. aureus, 
in shelf-stable products); or (3) a pH (acidity) 
level of 4.6 or less in shelf-stable products are not 
subject to the evisceration recommendation. 
•	 
Strategies for controlling pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
Pathogens can enter the process on raw materials. 
They can also be introduced into foods during 
processing, from the air, unclean hands, insanitary 
utensils and equipment, contaminated water, and 
sewage.  There are a number of strategies for the 
control of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery 
products.  They include: 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in this chapter); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the pH in the product (covered 
by the Acidified Foods regulation, 21 CFR 
114, for shelf-stable acidified products, and 
by Chapter 13 for refrigerated acidified 
products); 
•	 Controlling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration to 
control pathogens from the harvest area 
(covered in Chapter 12); 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
294 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
•	 Controlling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18); 
•	 Managing the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
production (covered generally in Chapter 12; 
for C. botulinum, in Chapter 13; and for S. 
aureus in hydrated batter mixes, in Chapter 
15); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by cooking 
or pasteurization (covered in Chapter 16) 
or by retorting (covered by the Thermally 
Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in 
Hermetically Sealed Containers regulation, 21 
CFR 113 (called the Low-Acid Canned Foods 
Regulation in this guidance document)); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by processes that 
retain raw product characteristics (covered in 
Chapter 17). 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether pathogenic bacteria growth 
and toxin formation as a result of inadequate 
drying is a significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 For shelf-stable, dried products, is it reasonably 
likely that S. aureus will grow and form toxin in 
the finished product if the product is inadequately 
dried? 
Table A-1 (Appendix 4) provides information 
on the conditions under which S. aureus will 
grow.  If your food that is not distributed 
refrigerated or frozen and meets these 
conditions (i.e., in Table A-1) before drying, 
then drying will usually be important to the 
safety of the product, because it provides 
the barrier to S. aureus growth and toxin 
formation.  Under ordinary circumstances, it 
would be reasonably likely that S. aureus will 
grow and form toxin in such products during 
finished product storage and distribution 
if drying is not properly performed.  Note 
that drying to control toxin formation by S. 
aureus will also control toxin formation by C. 
botulinum in these products. 
2.	 For shelf-stable, dried products, can S. aureus 
toxin formation that is reasonably likely to occur 
be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level 
at this processing step? 
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation as a result of inadequate drying 
should also be considered a significant 
hazard at any processing step where a 
preventive measure is, or can be, used to 
eliminate the hazard of S. aureus toxin 
formation (or reduce the likelihood of its 
occurrence to an acceptable level) if it is 
reasonably likely to occur.  The preventive 
measure that can be applied for pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as a 
result of inadequate drying are: 
•	 Proper design and control of the drying 
process (covered in this chapter); 
3.	 For refrigerated or frozen, partially dried (i.e., 
not shelf stable) products, is it reasonably likely 
that C. botulinum type E and nonproteolytic types 
B and F will grow and form toxin in the finished 
product if the product is inadequately dried? 
Table A-1 (Appendix 4) provides information 
on the conditions under which C. botulinum 
type E and non-proteolytic types B and F 
will grow.  Because of the need to prevent 
rehydration of dried products, these products 
generally will be contained in a reduced 
oxygen package.  If your refrigerated (not 
frozen), reduced oxygen packaged food meets 
these conditions (i.e., Table A-1) before drying, 
then drying will usually be important to the 
safety of the product, because it provides 
the barrier to growth and toxin formation 
by C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F.  Note that refrigeration will 
control toxin formation by S. aureus and C. 
botulinum type A and non-proteolytic types 
B and F in these products.  Under ordinary 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
295 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
circumstances, it would be reasonably likely 
that C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F will grow and form toxin 
in such products during finished product 
storage and distribution if drying is not 
properly performed.  In addition, controlling 
labeling (e.g., “keep refrigerated” labeling) to 
ensure that the product is held refrigerated 
throughout distribution may be important to 
the safety of the product, because the product 
may appear to retailers, consumers, and end 
users to be shelf stable. 
However, if your dried, reduced oxygen 
packaged product is distributed frozen, then 
freezing may provide the barrier to growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F, rather 
than drying.  In this case, labeling to ensure 
that the product is distributed frozen may 
be important to the safety of the product. 
Chapter 13 provides guidance on labeling 
controls to ensure that frozen product that 
supports the growth of non-proteolytic C. 
botulinum is distributed frozen. 
4.	 For refrigerated or frozen, partially dried, reduced 
oxygen packaged dried products, can growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F that are reasonably 
likely to occur be eliminated or reduced to an 
acceptable level at this processing step? 
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation as a result of inadequate drying 
should be considered a significant hazard 
at any processing step where a preventive 
measure is, or can be, used to eliminate 
the hazard (or reduce the likelihood of its 
occurrence to an acceptable level) if it is 
reasonably likely to occur.  The preventive 
measures that can be applied for pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as a 
result of inadequate drying for refrigerated 
or frozen, partially dried, reduced oxygen 
packaged products are: 
•	 Proper design and control of the drying 
process (covered in this chapter); 
•	 Refrigeration (covered in Chapter 
12) and labeling to ensure that the 
product is held refrigerated throughout 
distribution (covered in this chapter); 
•	 Freezing (Chapter 13 provides guidance 
on labeling controls to ensure that a 
frozen product that otherwise supports 
the growth of non-proteolytic C. 
botulinum is distributed frozen). 
•	 
Intended use 
Because of the highly stable nature of S. aureus 
toxin and the extremely toxic nature of C. 
botulinum toxin, it is unlikely that the intended 
use will affect the significance of the hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a critical 
control point (CCP) for pathogenic bacteria growth 
and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying: 
1.	 If you identified the hazard of pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of 
inadequate drying as significant because drying 
(rather than, or in addition to, refrigeration) is 
important to the safety of the product, you should 
identify the drying step as a CCP for this hazard. 
Example: 
A salmon jerky processor that distributes 
the product unrefrigerated should set 
the CCP for controlling the hazard of 
pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation as a result of inadequate drying 
at the drying step.  The processor would 
not need to identify the processing steps 
prior to drying as CCPs for that hazard. 
However, these steps may be CCPs for 
the control of other hazards, such as the 
growth of pathogenic bacteria as a result 
of time and temperature abuse during 
processing, covered by Chapter 12. 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
296 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Control by Drying.” 
2.	 If you identified the hazard of pathogenic 
bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result 
of inadequate drying as significant because 
refrigeration (in addition to drying) is important 
to the safety of the product, you should identify 
the finished product storage step and the 
labeling step, where you will ensure that the 
“keep refrigerated” labeling is included on every 
package, as a CCP, for this hazard. 
Example: 
A partially dried catfish processor that 
distributes the product refrigerated and 
reduced oxygen packaged should set 
the CCPs for controlling the hazard of 
pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation as a result of inadequate 
drying at the drying step, finished 
product labeling step, and finished 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides examples of 
two control strategies for pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation that occurs as a 
result of inadequate drying.  It may be necessary 
to select more than one control strategy in order 
to fully control the hazard, depending upon 
the nature of your operation.  It is important 
to note that you may select a control strategy 
that is different from those that are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO MAY APPLY TO 
CONTROL STRATEGY PRIMARY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR PROCESSOR 
Control by drying  
Control by refrigeration 
with labeling 
 
product storage step.  The processor would 
not need to identify the processing steps 
prior to drying as CCPs for that hazard.  
However, these steps may be CCPs for 
the control of other hazards, such as the 
growth of pathogenic bacteria as a result 
of time and temperature abuse during 
processing, covered by Chapter 12. 
The control by drying is covered in “Control 
Strategy Example 1 - Control by Drying.” 
Control of labeling is referred to in this 
chapter as “Control Strategy Example 2 ­
Control by Refrigeration With Labeling.”  It 
should be used along with “Control Strategy 
Example 1 - Control by Drying.”  Note that 
control of refrigerated finished product storage 
is covered in Chapter 12.  Note also that 
Chapter 13 provides guidance on labeling 
controls to ensure that a frozen product 
that otherwise supports the growth of non­
proteolytic C. botulinum is distributed frozen. 
•	 
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CONTROL BY 
DRYING 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The minimum or maximum values for the 
critical factors established by a scientific 
study (i.e., for shelf-stable products, those 
which must be met in order to ensure that 
the finished product has a water activity of 
0.85 or below; for refrigerated (not frozen), 
reduced oxygen packaged products, those 
which must be met in order to ensure that 
the finished product has a water activity of 
less than 0.97).  These will likely include 
drying time, input/output air temperature, 
humidity, and velocity, as well as flesh 
thickness.  Other critical factors that affect 
the rate of drying of the product may also be 
established by the study; 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
297 
 
 
OR 
•	 The minimum percent weight loss 
established by a scientific study (i.e., for 
shelf-stable products, that which must be met 
in order to ensure that the finished product 
has a water activity of 0.85 or below; for 
refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged products, that which must be met 
in order to ensure that the finished product 
has a water activity of less than 0.97); 
OR 
•	 For shelf-stable products: 
°  Maximum finished product water activity 
of 0.85 or above;
 
OR
 
•	 For refrigerated (not frozen), reduced oxygen 
packaged products:  
°  Maximum finished product water activity 
of less than 0.97. 
Note: A heat treatment, addition of chemical additives, further 
drying, or other treatment may be necessary to inhibit or eliminate 
spoilage organisms (e.g., mold) in shelf-stable products. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Critical factors of the established drying process  
that affect the ability of the process to ensure  
the desired finished product water activity (i.e.,  
0.85 or below for shelf-stable products, less  
than 0.97 for refrigerated (not frozen), reduced  
oxygen packaged products).  These may 
include drying time, air temperature, humidity,  
and velocity, as well as flesh thickness; 
OR 
•	 Percent weight loss; 
OR 
•	 Water activity of the finished product. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
For batch drying equipment: 
•	 For drying time and input/output air 
temperature:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  Use equipment appropriate for the 
measurement;
 
OR
 
•	 For percent weight loss: 
°  Weigh all, or a portion, of the batch 
before and after drying;
 
OR
 
•	 For water activity analysis: 
°  Collect a representative sample of the 
finished product and conduct water 
activity analysis. 
For continuous drying equipment: 
•	 For input/output air temperature:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND 
•	 For drying time: 
°  Measure:
•	 The revolutions per minute (RPM) 
of the belt drive wheel, using 
a stopwatch or tachometer; 
OR 
•	 The time necessary for a test unit 
or belt marking to pass through the 
equipment, using a stopwatch; 
AND 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  Use equipment appropriate for the 
measurement;
 
OR
 
•	 For percent weight loss: 
°  Weigh all, or a portion, of the batch 
before and after drying; 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
298 
 
 
 
OR 
•	 For water activity: 
°  Collect a representative sample of the 
finished product and conduct water 
activity analysis. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
For batch drying equipment: 
•	 For time and temperature: 
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
during each batch; 
AND 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  As often as necessary to maintain control; 
OR 
•	 For percent weight loss: 
°  Each batch;
OR 
•	 For water activity: 
°  Each batch.
For continuous drying equipment: 
•	 For temperature:  
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per day; 
AND 
•	 For time:  
°  At least once per day, and whenever any 
changes in belt speed are made;
 
AND
 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  As often as necessary to maintain control; 
OR 
•	 For percent weight loss: 
°  Each lot of finished product; 
OR 
•	 For water activity: 
Each lot of finished product. ° 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:
  
°  Monitoring is performed by the
  
equipment itself.   The visual check of  
the data generated by this equipment,  
to ensure that the critical limits have  
consistently been met, may be performed  
by any person who has an understanding  
of the nature of the controls;   
AND 
•	 For all other critical factors specified by the 
study:  
°  Any person who has an understanding of 
the nature of the controls;
 
OR
 
•	 For percent weight loss: 
°  Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls;
 
OR
 
•	 For water activity: 
°  Any person with sufficient training to 
perform the analysis. 
 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Redry the product (provided that redrying 
does not present an unacceptable 
opportunity for pathogenic bacteria growth); 
OR 
•	 Chill and hold the product for an evaluation 
of the adequacy of the drying process.  
The evaluation may involve water activity 
determination on a representative sample 
of the finished product.  If the evaluation 
shows that the product has not received an 
adequate drying process, the product should 
be destroyed, diverted to a use in which 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
299 
pathogenic bacteria growth in the finished 
product will be controlled by means other 
than drying, diverted to a non-food use, or 
redried;  
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable because 
pathogenic bacteria growth in the finished 
product will be controlled by means other 
than drying (e.g., divert inadequately dried 
fish to a frozen fish operation); 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a non-food use; 
OR 
•	 Destroy the product.  
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Adjust the air temperature or velocity; 
OR 
•	 Adjust the length of the drying cycle to 
compensate for a temperature or velocity 
drop, humidity increase, or inadequate 
percent weight loss; 
OR 
•	 Adjust the belt speed to increase the length 
of the drying cycle. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
For batch drying equipment: 
•	 Record of continuous temperature 
monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of visual checks of recorded data; 
AND 
•	 Record of notation of the start time and end 
time of the drying periods;  
AND 
•	 Records that are appropriate for the other  
critical factors (e.g., a drying log that indicates  
input/output air humidity and/or velocity); 
OR 
•	 Record of weight before and after drying; 
OR 
•	 Record of water activity analysis. 
For continuous drying equipment: 
•	 Record of continuous temperature 
monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of visual checks of recorded data; 
AND 
•	 Drying log that indicates the RPM of the belt  
drive wheel or the time necessary for a test  
unit or belt marking to pass through the drier; 
AND 
•	 Records that are appropriate for the other  
critical factors (e.g., a drying log that indicates  
input/output air humidity and/or velocity); 
OR 
•	 Record of weight before and after drying; 
OR 
•	 Record of water activity analysis. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Process validation study (except where a 
water activity analysis of the finished product 
is the monitoring procedure):  
°  The adequacy of the drying process 
should be established by a scientific 
study.  For shelf-stable products, the 
drying process should be designed to 
ensure the production of a shelf-stable 
product with a water activity of 0.85.   
For refrigerated (not frozen), reduced 
oxygen packaged products, it should be 
designed to ensure a finished product 
water activity of less than 0.97.  Expert 
knowledge of drying process calculations 
and the dynamics of mass transfer in 
processing equipment may be required 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
300 
to establish such a drying process.  Such 
knowledge can be obtained by education 
or experience or both.  Establishment of 
drying processes may require access to 
adequate facilities and the application 
of recognized methods.   The drying 
equipment should be designed,  operated,  
and maintained to deliver the established 
drying process to every unit of a product.   
In some instances, drying studies may 
be required to establish the minimum 
process.  In other instances, existing 
literature that establishes minimum 
processes or adequacy of equipment is 
available.  Characteristics of the process,  
product, and/or equipment that affect 
the ability to achive  the established 
minimum drying process should be 
taken into consideration in the process 
establishment.  A record of the process 
establishment should be maintained; 
AND 
•	 Finished product sampling and analysis to 
determine water activity at least once every 
3 months (except where such testing is 
performed as part of monitoring); 
AND 
•	 Before a temperature-recording device (e.g., 
a recording thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify 
that the factory calibration has not been 
affected.  This check can be accomplished 
by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point.  Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
OR 
°  Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading 
on the device with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a thermometer traceable to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
air temperature) within the temperature 
range at which it will be used; 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-recording device  
against a known accurate reference device 
(e.g., a NIST-traceable thermometer) at 
least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
301 
device).  For example, devices subjected to 
high temperatures for extended periods of 
time may require more frequent calibration.  
Calibration should be performed at a 
minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate other instruments as necessary to 
ensure their accuracy; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
302 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
303 
TABLE 14-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CONTROL BY DRYING
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Control by Drying.”  This example illustrates
how a processor of shelf-stable salmon jerky can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying.  It is provided for illustrative purposes
only.  It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 
(Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Drying 
(forced 
convection 
oven) 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Maximum
product 
thickness: ¼ 
inch 
Product 
thickness 
Preset slicer to
just less than ¼
inch 
Once per
day before 
operations 
Slicer
operator 
Re-adjust 
slicer 
Processing log Documentation
of drying process 
establishment
Check the data
logger for accuracy 
and damage and
to ensure that
it is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it daily, at 
the beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year 
Analyze the
finished product 
sample once every 
3 months for water 
activity 
Review of 
monitoring,
corrective action 
and verification,
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
  
 
 
TABLE 14-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CONTROL BY DRYING
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Control by Drying.”  This example illustrates
how a processor of shelf-stable salmon jerky can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying.  It is provided for illustrative purposes
only.  It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 
(Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
304 
Drying 
(forced 
convection 
oven) 
Pathogenic
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Minimum
drying time:  5 
hours 
Drying time Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
each batch 
Oven 
operator 
Continue
drying 
Data logger
printout 
Documentation
of drying process 
establishment
Check the data
logger for accuracy 
and damage and
to ensure that it is
operational before 
putting into
operation; check it 
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year 
Analyze the
finished product 
sample once every 
3 months for 
water activity 
Review of 
monitoring,
corrective action 
and verification,
records within 1
week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
TABLE 14-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CONTROL BY DRYING
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Control by Drying.”  This example illustrates
how a processor of shelf-stable salmon jerky can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying.  It is provided for illustrative purposes
only.  It may be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 
(Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., aquaculture drugs, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, parasites, and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
305 
Drying 
(forced 
convection 
oven) 
Pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
and toxin 
formation 
Minimum oven 
temperature: 
140°F
To achieve 
a final water 
activity of 0.85 
or less 
Oven air input 
temperature 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
each batch 
Oven 
operator 
Extend 
drying 
process
Segregate the
product and 
hold under
refrigeration 
for 
evaluation
Evaluate by 
performing 
water 
activity 
analysis on
finished
product
Redry if less 
than 0.85 
Data logger
printout 
Documentation
of drying process 
establishment
Check the data
logger for accuracy 
and damage and
to ensure that
it is operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it daily, at 
the beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year 
Analyze the
finished product 
sample once every 
3 months for 
water activity 
Review of 
monitoring,
corrective action 
and verification,
records within 1
week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - CONTROL BY 
REFRIGERATION WITH LABELING 
It may be necessary to select more than one 
control strategy in order to fully control the 
hazard, depending upon the nature of your 
operation. 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All finished product labels must contain 
a “keep refrigerated” statement (e.g., 
“Important, keep refrigerated until used”). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Finished product labels for presence of “keep 
refrigerated” statement. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual examination. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Representative number of packages from 
each lot of a finished product. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Segregate and relabel any improperly labeled 
product. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Segregate and return or destroy any label 
stock or pre-labeled packaging stock that 
does not contain the proper statement; 
AND 
•	 Determine and correct the cause of improper 
labels. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record of labeling checks. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
306 
 
 
 
TABLE 14-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - CONTROL BY REFRIGERATION WITH LABELING
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Control by Refrigeration With Labeling.”  This example illustrates how a processor of
refrigerated, partially dried catfish can control pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  It may 
be necessary to select more than one control strategy in order to fully control the hazard, depending upon the nature of your operation.
Pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation as a result of inadequate drying may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 
(Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides and metal fragments).
Example Only
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Receipt of 
labeling 
C. botulinum 
toxin 
formation 
during
finished
product 
storage 
All finished
product labels 
must contain a
“keep 
refrigerated”
statement 
Finished
product 
labels for the 
presence of
the “keep 
refrigerated”
statement 
Visual 
examination 
One label from
each case of
labels at
receipt 
Receiving 
employee 
Segregate and
re-label any
improperly
labeled product 
Segregate
and return or 
destroy any 
label stock
that does not
contain the
proper
statement
Determine 
and correct 
the cause of
improper labels 
Label receiving
record 
Review 
monitoring and
correction 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
*Note: Chapter 12 covers control of pathogenic bacteria growth at the CCP of finished product storage. 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Hilderbrand, K. S. 1992. Fish smoking 
procedures for forced convection 
smokehouses, Special report 887. Oregon State 
University, Extension Service, Corvallis, OR. 
•	 Hilderbrand, K. S., Jr. 1996. Personal 
communication. Oregon State University, 
Extension Service, Corvallis, Oregon. 
•	 McClure, P. J., M. B. Cole, and J. P. P. M. 
Smelt. 1994. Effects of water activity and pH 
on growth of Clostridium botulinum. J. Appl. 
Bact. Symp. Suppl. 76:105S-114S. 
•	 Tatini, S. R. 1973. Influence of food 
environments on growth of Staphylococcus 
aureus and production of various enterotoxins. 
J. Milk Food Technol. 36:559-563. 
CHAPTER 14: Pathogenic Bacteria Growth and Toxin Formation as a Result of Inadequate Drying 
308 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) toxin formation 
in hydrated batter mixes can cause consumer 
illness. S. aureus is the bacterium responsible 
for Staphylococcal Food Poisoning (SFP).  Ten 
to thirty outbreaks of SFP occur annually in the 
United States, from all sources.  Symptoms include: 
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, 
and weakness.  Symptoms usually start within 4 
hours of consumption.  Everyone is susceptible to 
intoxication by S. aureus toxin, with more severe 
symptoms, including occasionally death, occurring 
in infants, the elderly, and debilitated persons. 
Generally, it is a self-limiting illness. 
This chapter covers control of S. aureus toxin 
formation that occurs as a result of time and 
temperature abuse at the hydrated batter mix 
storage or recirculation step.  This toxin in 
particular is a concern at this step because it is not 
likely to be destroyed by subsequent heating steps 
that the processor or the consumer may perform. 
Pathogenic bacteria other than S. aureus, such as 
those described in Chapter 12, are less likely to 
grow in hydrated batter mixes and/or are likely to 
be killed by subsequent heating. 
•	 
Control of S. aureus in batter mixes 
S. aureus can enter the process on raw materials. 
It can also be introduced into foods during 
processing, from unclean hands and insanitary 
utensils and equipment. 
The hazard develops when a batter mix is 
exposed to temperatures favorable for S. aureus 
growth for sufficient time to permit toxin 
development. S. aureus toxin does not normally 
reach levels that will cause food poisoning until 
the numbers of the pathogen reach 500,000 
to 1,000,000 per gram.  S. aureus will grow at 
temperatures as low as 44.6°F (7°C) and at a water 
activity as low as 0.83 (additional information 
on conditions favorable to S. aureus growth is 
provided in Table A-1 (Appendix 4)).  However, 
toxin formation is not likely at temperatures lower 
than 50°F (10°C) or at water activities below 0.85. 
For this reason, toxin formation can be controlled 
by minimizing exposure of hydrated batter mixes 
to temperatures above 50°F (10°C).  Exposure 
times greater than 12 hours at temperatures 
between 50°F (10°C) and 70°F (21.1°C) could result 
in toxin formation.  Exposure times greater than 
3 hours at temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C) could 
also result in toxin formation. 
•	 
Strategies for controlling pathogen growth 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogens in fish and fishery products. They 
include: 
•	 Managing the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogen growth and toxin production 
(covered in this chapter for S. aureus 
in hydrated batter mix; Chapter 13 for 
Clostridium botulinum; and Chapter 12 for 
other pathogenic bacteria and conditions); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by cooking or 
pasteurizing (covered in Chapter 16), or 
retorting (covered by the Thermally Processed 
Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically 
Sealed Containers regulation, 21 CFR 113 
(called the Low-Acid Canned Foods Regulation 
in this guidance document)); 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
309 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by processes 
that retain the raw product characteristics 
(covered in Chapter 17); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by Chapter 13 for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	 Controlling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration  to 
control pathogens from the harvest area  
(covered in Chapter 4); 
•	 Controlling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18). 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether S. aureus toxin formation in 
hydrated batter mixes is a significant hazard at a 
processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that S. aureus will grow 
and form toxin in the hydrated batter mix at the 
hydrated batter mix storage or recirculation step? 
The previous section, “Understand the Potential 
Hazard,” provides information to help you 
decide whether the time and temperature 
conditions of your hydrated batter mix storage 
or recirculation step are favorable for S. aureus 
growth and toxin formation. 
2.	 Can the hazard of S. aureus growth and toxin 
formation that was introduced at an earlier step 
be eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level 
at this processing step? 
S. aureus toxin formation in hydrated batter 
mixes should be considered a significant 
hazard at any processing step where a 
preventive measure is, or can be, used to 
eliminate the hazard (or reduce the likelihood 
of its occurrence to an acceptable level) if it 
is reasonably likely to occur.  The preventive 
measure that can be applied for S. aureus 
toxin formation in hydrated batter mixes is 
controlling the amount of time that hydrated 
batter mixes are exposed to temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C). 
•	 
Intended use 
Because of the highly heat-stable nature of S. 
aureus toxin, it is unlikely that the intended use 
will affect the significance of the hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
If the hazard of S. aureus toxin formation in 
hydrated batter mixes is significant, you should 
identify the hydrated batter mix storage or 
recirculation step as the critical control point 
(CCP) for this hazard.  For hand-battering 
operations, where hydrated batter mix is stored 
at each hand-battering station, the hand-battering 
stations also should be identified as a CCP. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example - Hydrated Batter Mix Control.” 
Example: 
A mechanized breaded fish processor should 
set the CCP for controlling the hazard of 
S. aureus growth and toxin formation in 
hydrated batter mixes at the hydrated batter 
mix storage or recirculation step.  The 
processor would not need to identify other 
processing steps as CCPs for that hazard. 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides an example of 
a control strategy for S. aureus toxin formation 
in hydrated batter mixes.  It is important to 
note that you may select a control strategy 
that is different from that which is suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following is an example of the control 
strategy included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO MAY APPLY TO 
CONTROL STRATEGY PRIMARY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR PROCESSOR 
Hydrated batter mix control  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - HYDRATED 
BATTER MIX CONTROL 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 Hydrated batter mix should not be held 
for more than 12 hours, cumulatively, at 
temperatures between 50°F (10°C) and 70ºF 
(21.1ºC); 
AND 
•	 Hydrated batter mix should not be held 
for more than 3 hours, cumulatively, at 
temperatures above 70ºF (21.1ºC). 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The temperature of the hydrated batter mix 
and the time of exposure at temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C) and above 70ºF (21.1ºC). 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
OR 
•	 Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) and observe the time of 
exposure. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per day; 
OR 
•	 For temperature-indicating devices: 
At least every 2 hours. 
° 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For temperature-recording devices:  
°  Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
OR 
•	 For temperature-indicating devices:  
°  Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Destroy the product and remaining hydrated 
batter mix; 
OR 
•	 Divert the product and remaining hydrated 
batter mix to a non-food use; 
OR 
•	 Hold the product and hydrated batter until it 
can be evaluated based on its total time and 
temperature exposure; 
OR 
•	 Hold the product and hydrated batter 
mix until the hydrated batter mix can be 
sampled and analyzed for the presence of 
staphylococcal enterotoxin.  
AND 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
311 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Add ice to the hydrated batter mix storage 
and recirculation tank; 
AND/OR 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the hydrated 
batter mix refrigeration equipment.  
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
°  Recorder thermometer charts or digital time  
and temperature data logger printouts;
 
AND
 
°  Record of visual checks of recorded data; 
 
OR 
•	 For temperature-indicating devices:  
°  Record of visual checks of devices (time 
and temperature). 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature-recording  
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected.  This check can be 
accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used 
at or near the boiling point.  Note that 
the temperature should be adjusted to 
compensate for altitude, when necessary; 
OR 
°  Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading  
on the device with the reading on a  
known accurate reference device (e.g., 
a thermometer traceable to National  
Institute of Standards and Technology  
(NIST) standards) under conditions that are  
similar to how it will be used (e.g., batter  
temperature) within the temperature range  
at which it will be used;  
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording  
device daily before the beginning of  
operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks may  
be appropriate if they are recommended by  
the instrument manufacturer and the history  
of use of the instrument in your facility has  
shown that the instrument consistently remains  
accurate for a longer period of time.  In  
addition to checking that the device is accurate  
by one of the methods described above, this  
process should include a visual examination of  
the sensor and any attached wires for damage  
or kinks.  The device should be checked  
to ensure that it is operational and, where  
applicable, has sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer.  Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions  
of use of the device.  Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration 
or the need to replace the device (perhaps 
with a more durable device).  Calibration 
should be performed at a minimum of two 
temperatures that bracket the temperature  
range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
312 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
313 
TABLE 15-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - HYDRATED BATTER MIX CONTROL
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example - Hydrated Batter Mix Control.”  This 
example illustrates how a breaded fish processor can control S. aureus toxin formation in hydrated batter mixes.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  
S. aureus toxin formation in hydrated batter mixes may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential 
hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides and metal fragments).
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Batter mix
recirculation
tank 
S. aureus 
growth and 
toxin 
formation 
Hydrated 
batter mix
temperature not 
to exceed 50°F 
for more than 
12 hours,
cumulatively,
nor 70°F for 
more than
3 hours,
cumulatively 
The
temperature 
of the
hydrated 
batter mix and
the time of
exposure at 
temperatures 
above 50°F 
(10°C) and
above 70ºF 
(21.1ºC) 
Recorder 
thermometer 
Continuous,
with visual
check once per
day 
Production 
employee 
Destroy 
hydrated 
batter mix and
any product 
produced
during the
period of the
deviation 
Adjust hydrated 
batter mix
refrigeration 
equipment 
Recorder 
thermometer 
chart 
Check the
recorder
thermometer 
for accuracy 
and damage
and to ensure
that it is
operational 
before putting 
into operation; 
check it
daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once 
per year 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective 
action, and 
verification 
records within
1 week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Baird-Parker, A. C. 1971. Factors affecting 
the production of bacterial food poisoning 
toxins. J. Appl. Bact. 34:181-197. 
•	 Beckers, H. J., F. M. van Leusden, and P. 
D. Tips. 1985. Growth and enterotoxin 
production of Staphylococcus aureus in 
shrimp. J. Hyg., Camb. 95:685-693. 
•	 Bryan, F. L. 1979. Staphylococcus aureus 
in food microbiology: public health and 
spoilage aspects. The Avi Publishing 
Company, Inc., Westport, CT. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L. 1991. Microbiological 
criteria for cooked, ready-to-eat shrimp and 
crabmeat. Food Technol. 45:157-160. 
•	 Dahl Sawyer, C. A., and J. J. Pestka. 1985. 
Foodservice systems: presence of injured 
bacteria in foods during food product flow. 
Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 39:51-67. 
•	 Deibel, K. E. 1995. Potential of 
Staphylococcus aureus to produce 
enterotoxin in fish batter at various 
temperatures, p. 33. In Medallion Lab (ed.), 
Proceedings of the IFT Annual Meeting. 
Medallion Lab, Minneapolis, MN. 
•	 Dengremont, E., and J. M. Membre. 1995. 
Statistical approach for comparison of the 
growth rates of five strains of Staphylococcus 
aureus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61:4389­
4395. 
•	 Duran, A. P., B. A. Wentz, J. M. Lanier, F. D. 
McClure, A. H. Schwab, A. Swartzentruber, 
R. J. Barnard, and R. B. Read. 1983. 
Microbiological quality of breaded shrimp 
during processing. J. Food Prot. 46:974-977. 
•	 Godwin, G. J., R. M. Grodner, and A. F. 
Novak. 1977. Twenty-four hour methods 
for bacteriological analyses in frozen raw 
breaded shrimp. J. Food Sci. 42:750-754. 
•	 Greenwood, M. H., E. F. C. Coetzee, B. 
M. Ford, P. Gill, W. L. Hooper, S. C. W. 
Matthews, S. Patrick, J. V. S. Pether, and R. 
J. D. Scott. 1985. The bacteriological quality 
of selected retail, ready-to-eat food products. 
III. Cooked crustaceans and mollusks. 
Environ. Health 93:236-239. 
•	 Hughes, A., and A. Hurst. 1980. The effect 
of NaCl on the upper temperature limit for 
growth of and enterotoxin synthesis by 
Staphylococcus aureus. Can. J. Microbiol. 
26:507-510. 
•	 Lotter, L. P., and L. Leistner. 1978. Minimal 
water activity for enterotoxin A production 
and growth of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 36:377-380. 
•	 Ostovar, K., and M. J. Bremier. 1975. Effect of 
thawing on growth of Staphylococcus aureus 
in frozen convenience food items. J. Milk 
Food Technol. 38:337-339. 
•	 Potter, L., and L. Leistner. 1978. Minimal 
water activity for enterotoxin A production 
and growth of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 36:377-380. 
•	 Raj, H. D. 1970. Public health bacteriology of 
processed frozen foods. Lab. Pract. 19:374­
377, 394. 
•	 Sutherland, J. P., A. J. Bayliss, and T. A. 
Roberts. 1994. Predictive modeling of growth 
of Staphylococcus aureus: the effects of 
temperature, pH and sodium chloride. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 21:217-236. 
CHAPTER 15: Staphylococcus aureus Toxin Formation in Hydrated Batter Mixes 
314 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
The survival of pathogenic bacteria through 
cooking or pasteurization can cause consumer 
illness. The primary pathogens of concern are 
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum), Listeria 
monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes), Campylobacter 
jejuni (C. jejuni), pathogenic strains of Escherichia 
coli (E. coli), Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Yersinia 
enterocolitica (Y. enterocolitica), Staphylococcus 
aureus (S. aureus), Vibrio cholera (V. cholera), 
Vibrio vulnificus (V. vulnificus), and Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus (V. parahaemolyticus). See 
Appendix 7 for a description of the public health 
impacts of these pathogens. 
It is not practical to target viral pathogens in 
cooking or pasteurization processes because of 
their extreme heat resistance. Viral pathogens 
should be controlled through a rigorous sanitation 
regime as part of a prerequisite program or as 
part of Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) itself. The Procedures for the Safe and 
Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and 
Fishery Products regulation, 21 CFR 123 (called 
the Seafood HACCP Regulation in this guidance 
document) requires such a regime. 
•	 
Types of heat processing 
Cooking is a heat treatment, usually performed 
before the product is placed in the finished product 
container. It is applied to fishery products that are 
distributed either refrigerated or frozen. Generally, 
after cooking, fishery products are referred to as 
cooked, ready to eat. Examples of cooked, ready-
to-eat fishery products are crabmeat, lobster meat, 
crayfish meat, cooked shrimp, surimi-based analog 
products, seafood salads, seafood soups and 
sauces, and hot-smoked fish. 
Pasteurization is a treatment (usually, but not 
always, the application of heat) applied to 
eliminate the most resistant pathogenic bacteria 
of public health concern that is reasonably likely 
to be present in the food for as long as the shelf-
life of the product, when stored under normal 
and moderate abuse conditions. With fishery 
products, pasteurization is usually performed after 
the product is placed in the hermetically sealed 
finished product container. It is applied to fishery 
products that are distributed either refrigerated or 
frozen. Examples of pasteurized fishery products 
are pasteurized crabmeat, pasteurized surimi-based 
analog products, and pasteurized lobster meat. 
In addition to eliminating bacterial pathogens, 
cooking and pasteurization also greatly reduce 
the number of spoilage bacteria present in the 
fishery product. These bacteria normally restrict 
the growth of pathogens through competition. 
Elimination of spoilage bacteria allows rapid 
growth of newly introduced pathogenic bacteria. 
Pathogenic bacteria that may be introduced after 
cooking or pasteurization are, therefore, a concern. 
This is especially true for pasteurization, because 
that process can significantly extend the shelf-life 
of the fishery product, providing more time for 
pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation. 
Retorting is a heat treatment that eliminates all 
food-borne pathogens and produces a product 
that is shelf stable. Mandatory controls for retorting 
are provided in the Thermally Processed Low-Acid 
Foods Packaged in Hermetically Sealed Containers 
regulation, 21 CFR 113 (hereinafter, the Low Acid 
Canned Foods (LACF) Regulation), but are not 
covered in this chapter. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
315 
•	 Goal of pasteurization 
Selection of the target pathogen is critical to  
the effectiveness of pasteurization. You should  
consider the potential that C. botulinum type  
E or non-proteolytic types B and F will survive  
the pasteurization process and grow under  
normal storage conditions or moderate abuse  
conditions. This is of particular concern if the  
product is reduced oxygen packaged (e.g.,  
vacuum packaged or modified atmosphere  
packaged), does not contain a barrier that is  
sufficient to prevent growth and toxin formation  
by this pathogen, is not equipped with a time  
and temperature integrator, and is stored or  
distributed refrigerated (not frozen). In such  
products, you should ordinarily select C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types  
B and F as the target pathogen. For example,  
vacuum-packaged lobster meat that is pasteurized  
to kill L. monocytogenes, but not C. botulinum  
type E  or non-proteolytic types B and F, and  
is not equipped with a Time-Temperature  
Indicator should be frozen to prevent growth  
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type E  
and non-proteolytic types B and F, and should  
be labeled to be held frozen and to be thawed  
under refrigeration immediately before use (e.g.,  
“Important, keep frozen until used, thaw under  
refrigeration immediately before use”). 
If the product is not reduced oxygen packaged,  
or contains a barrier that is sufficient to prevent  
the growth and toxin formation by C. botulinum  
type E or non-proteolytic types B and F, or  
is equipped with a time and temperature  
integrator, or is distributed frozen, then selection  
of another target pathogen may be appropriate.  
L. monocytogenes may be selected as the target  
pathogen for pasteurization of this type of  
product because it is the most resistant bacterial  
pathogen of public health concern that is  
reasonably likely to be present. 
Surveys of retail display cases and home  
refrigerators indicate that temperatures above the  
minimum growth temperature of C. botulinum  
type E and non-proteolytic types B and F  
(38°F (3.3°C)) are not uncommon. Therefore,  
refrigeration alone cannot be relied upon for  
control of the C. botulinum hazard. When  
freezing is relied upon to control the growth of  
C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B  
and F, controls should be in place to ensure that  
the product is labeled with instructions that it be  
kept frozen throughout distribution. 
For pasteurization processes that target C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B and  
F, generally a reduction of six orders of magnitude  
(six logarithms, e.g., from 10
3 to 10-3) in the level  
of contamination is suitable. This is called a 6D  
process. However, lower degrees of destruction  
may be acceptable if supported by a scientific  
study of the normal levels in the food before  
pasteurization. It is also possible that higher levels  
of destruction may be necessary in some foods, if  
especially high initial levels of the target pathogen  
are anticipated. Table A-4 (Appendix 4) provides  
6D process times for a range of pasteurization  
temperatures, with  C. botulinum type B (the  
most heat resistant form of non-proteolytic C.  
botulinum) as the target pathogen. The lethal rates  
and process times provided in the table may not  
be sufficient for the destruction of C. botulinum  
type E and non-proteolytic types B and F in  
dungeness crabmeat, because of the potential that  
naturally occurring substances, such as lysozyme,  
may enable the pathogen to more easily recover  
after heat damage.  
Examples of properly pasteurized products are  
fish and fishery products generally (e.g., surimi­
based products, soups, or sauces) pasteurized  
to a minimum cumulative total lethality of F194°F  
(F90°C) = 10 minutes, where z = 12.6°F (7°C) for  
temperatures less than 194°F (90°C) and z = 18°F  
(10°C) for temperatures above 194°F (90°C); blue  
crabmeat pasteurized to a minimum cumulative  
total lethality of F185°F (F85°C) = 31 minutes, where z  
= 16°F (9°C); and dungeness crabmeat pasteurized  
to a minimum cumulative total lethality of F194°F  
(F90°C) = 57 minutes, where z = 15.5°F (8.6°C).  
Equivalent processes at different temperatures can  
be calculated using the z values provided. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXAMPLES OF PROPERLY 
PASTEURIZED PRODUCTS 
PRODUCT MINIMUM CUMULATIVE 
TOTAL LETHALITY Z VALUE 
Fish and 
fishery 
products 
generally 
(e.g., surimi­
based 
products, 
soups, or 
sauces) 
F194°F (F90°C) = 10 minutes 12.6°F (7°C), for 
temperatures 
less than 194°F 
(90°C) 
18°F (10°C) for 
temperatures 
above 194°F (90°C) 
Blue 
crabmeat 
F185°F (F85°C) = 31 minutes 16°F (9°C) 
Dungeness 
crabmeat 
F194°F (F90°C) = 57 minutes 15.5°F (8.6°C) 
In some pasteurized surimi-based products, salt, 
in combination with a milder heat pasteurization 
process in the finished product container, works 
to prevent growth and toxin formation by C. 
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B 
and F. An example of a properly pasteurized 
surimi-based product in which 2.4% water phase 
salt is present is one that has been pasteurized 
at an internal temperature of 185°F (85°C) for 
at least 15 minutes. This process may not be 
suitable for other types of products because of 
the unique formulation and processing involved 
in the manufacture of surimi-based products. 
Reduced oxygen-packaged foods that are 
pasteurized to control C. botulinum type E 
and non-proteolytic types B and F, but not C. 
botulinum type A and proteolytic types B and 
F, and that do not contain barriers to its growth 
should be refrigerated or frozen to control C. 
botulinum type A and proteolytic types B and 
F. Control of refrigeration is critical to the safety 
of these products. Further information on C. 
botulinum and reduced oxygen packaging is 
contained in Chapter 13. 
In cases where L. monocytogenes is selected 
as the target pathogen, a 6D process is also 
generally suitable. FDA and U.S. Department of 
Agriculture’s L. monocytogenes risk assessment 
indicates that approximately 8% of raw seafood 
are contaminated with from 1 to 10
3 colony 
forming unit (CFU)/g and that approximately 91% 
are contaminated at less than 1 CFU/g. Less than 
1% of raw seafood are contaminated at levels 
greater than 10
3 CFU/g and none at levels greater 
than 106 CFU/g. FDA’s limit for L. monocytogenes 
in ready-to-eat products, nondetectable, 
corresponds to a level of less than 1 CFU/25g. 
Table A-3 (Appendix 4) provides 6D process 
times for a range of pasteurization temperatures, 
with L. monocytogenes as the target pathogen. 
Lower degrees of destruction may be acceptable 
if supported by a scientific study of the normal 
levels in the food before pasteurization. It is also 
possible that higher degrees of destruction may 
be necessary in some foods if especially high 
initial levels are anticipated. 
Products that are pasteurized in the finished 
product container are at risk for recontamination 
after pasteurization. Controls, such as container 
seal integrity and protection from contaminated 
cooling water, are critical to the safety of these 
products and are covered in Chapter 18. 
•	 
Goal of cooking for most products 
One reason for cooking products that will not 
be reduced oxygen packaged is to eliminate 
vegetative cells of pathogenic bacteria (or reduce 
them to an acceptable level) that may have been 
introduced to the process by raw materials or 
by processing that occurs before the cooking 
step. Selection of the target pathogen is critical 
to the effectiveness of cooking. Generally, L. 
monocytogenes is selected as the target pathogen 
because it is regarded as the most heat-tolerant, 
foodborne bacterial pathogen that does not form 
spores. Cooking processes are not usually designed 
to eliminate spores of bacterial pathogens. 
Determining the degree of destruction of the target 
pathogen is also critical. Generally, a reduction of 
six orders of magnitude (six logarithms, e.g., from 
10
3 to 10-3) in the level of contamination is suitable. 
This is called a 6D process. 
Table A-3 provides 6D process times for a range of 
cooking temperatures, with L. monocytogenes as 
the target pathogen. Lower degrees of destruction 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
317 
 
 
 
 
may be acceptable if supported by a scientific 
study of the normal levels in the food before 
pasteurization. It is also possible that higher 
degrees of destruction may be necessary in some 
foods if especially high initial levels are anticipated. 
•	 
Goal of cooking refrigerated, reduced 
oxygen-packaged products 
Cooking is sometimes performed on products  
immediately before placement in reduced oxygen  
packaging (e.g., vacuum packaging or modified  
atmosphere packaging). These products include  
cooked, hot-filled soups, chowders, or sauces  
that are filled directly from the cook kettle using  
sanitary, automated, continuous filling systems  
designed to minimize risk of recontamination.  
They are often marketed under refrigeration,  
which is important for the control of C.  
botulinum type A and proteolytic types B and F.  
The cooking process for these products should 
be sufficient to eliminate the spores of C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B 
and F. This is the case when the product does 
not contain other barriers that are sufficient 
to prevent growth and toxin formation by 
this pathogen. Generally, a 6D process (six 
logarithms, e.g., from 10
3 to 10-3) is suitable. 
However, lower degrees of destruction may 
be acceptable if supported by a scientific 
study of the normal levels in the food before 
pasteurization. It is also possible that higher 
degrees of destruction may be necessary in 
some foods if especially high initial levels are 
anticipated. 
Table A-4 provides 6D process times for a range  
of cooking temperatures, with C. botulinum type  
B (the most heat-resistant form of non-proteolytic  
C. botulinum) as the target pathogen. The lethal  
rates and process times provided in the table  
may not be sufficient for the destruction of C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B  
and F in soups or sauces containing dungeness  
crabmeat because of the potential that naturally  
occurring substances, such as lysozyme, may  
enable the pathogen to more easily recover  
after damage. An example of a product that is  
properly cooked to eliminate C. botulinum type  
E and non-proteolytic types B and F is a soup or  
sauce that is cooked to a minimum cumulative  
total lethality of F
194°F (F90°C) = 10 minutes, where  
z = 12.6°F (7°C) for temperatures less than 194°F  
(90°C) and z = 18°F (10°C) for temperatures  
above 194°F (90°C).  
Reduced oxygen-packaged soups or sauces that  
are cooked immediately before packaging to  
control  C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic  
types B and F, but not C. botulinum type A and  
proteolytic types B and F, and that do not contain  
barriers to its growth should be refrigerated  
or frozen to control C. botulinum type A and  
proteolytic types B and F. Control of refrigeration  
is critical to the safety of these products. Further  
information on  C. botulinum and reduced oxygen  
packaging is contained in Chapter 13.  
Cooking processes that target C. botulinum  
type E and non-proteolytic types B and F have  
much in common with pasteurization processes.  
Like products that are pasteurized in the final  
container, products that are cooked and then  
placed in the final container also are at risk  
for recontamination after they are placed in  
the finished product container. Controls, such  
as container seal integrity and protection from  
contaminated cooling water, are critical to the  
safety of these products and are covered in  
Chapter 18.  
Additionally, because these products are cooked  
before they are packaged, they are at risk of  
recontamination between cooking and packaging.  
The risk of recontamination may be minimized  
by filling the container in a sanitary, automated,  
continuous filling system while the product is  
still hot (i.e., hot filling). This is another critical  
step for the safety of these products. This control  
strategy is suitable for products that are filled  
directly from the cooking kettle, where the risk of  
recontamination is minimized. It is not ordinarily  
suitable for products such as crabmeat, lobster  
meat, or crayfish meat that are handled between  
cooking and filling. Hot filling is also covered in  
Chapter 18. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
318 
•	 Control by cooking or pasteurization 
Controlling pathogenic bacteria survival through  
cooking or pasteurization is accomplished by: 
•	 Scientifically establishing a cooking or 
pasteurization process that will eliminate 
pathogenic bacteria of public health concern 
or reduce their numbers to acceptable levels; 
•	 Designing and operating the cooking or 
pasteurization equipment so that every unit 
of product receives at least the established 
minimum process; 
•	 Continuously monitoring the critical process 
parameters to verify achievement of a 
scientifically established process (e.g., time 
and temperature). 
You may monitor End-Point Internal Product  
Temperature (EPIPT), a measurement of the  
temperature of the product as it exits the heat  
process, instead of performing continuous time  
and temperature monitoring. This approach is  
suitable if you have conducted a scientific study  
to validate that the EPIPT that you have selected  
will provide an appropriate reduction in the  
numbers of the target pathogen (e.g., 6D) in the  
slowest heating unit or portion of product under  
the worst set of heating conditions covered by  
the scientific study. You should (1) conduct a  
temperature distribution study within the heating  
system to identify any cold spots; (2) conduct  
a heat penetration study that accounts for the  
slowest heating product under the worst case  
heating conditions covered by the scientific study;  
and identify other critical factors of processing  
and/or packaging that affect the rate of product  
heating when scientifically establishing a cooking  
or pasteurization process (i.e., process validation).  
The EPIPT should be used as a monitoring  
technique only under those conditions that  
were evaluated by the scientific study. Those  
conditions may need to be identified as critical  
limits and monitored as part of the HACCP plan. 
EPIPT monitoring may not be an option when  
the objective is control of C. botulinum type E  
and non-proteolytic types B and F spores. These  
spores are far more heat resistant than vegetative  
cells of L. monocytogenes and destroying them  
requires an EPIPT that could be achieved only  
in a pressurized steam environment, making  
measurement impractical. Additional guidance  
on EPIPT monitoring can be found in Food  
Processors Association guidance document “FPA  
Guidance Document: Establishing or Verifying  
a Heat Process for Cooked, Ready-to-Eat  
Seafood Products, and Heat Process Monitoring  
Considerations under HACCP,” 2nd Edition,  
February 2005 and purchased at the Grocery  
Manufacturers Association, Washington DC 20005. 
•	 
Strategies for controlling pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
There are a number of strategies for the control  
of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery  
products. They include: 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by cooking or 
pasteurizing (covered in this chapter) or 
retorting (covered by the LACF Regulation, 21 
CFR 113); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by processes that 
retain the raw characteristics of the products 
(covered in Chapter 17); 
•	 Managing the amount of time that food is  
exposed to temperatures that are favorable  
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin  
production (covered generally in Chapter  
12; for C. botulinum, in Chapter 13; and  
for S. aureus in hydrated batter mixes, in  
Chapter 15); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by Chapter 13 for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	 Controlling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration to 
control pathogens from the harvest area 
(covered in Chapter 4); 
•	 Controlling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18). 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether pathogenic bacteria 
survival through cooking and pasteurization is a 
significant hazard at a processing step. 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
pathogenic bacteria will be introduced at this 
processing step (do unsafe levels of pathogenic 
bacteria come in with the raw material, or will 
the process introduce unsafe levels of pathogenic 
bacteria)? 
It is reasonable to assume that pathogens of 
various types, including those listed in Table 
A-1 (Appendix 4), will be present on raw fish 
and fishery products. They may be present 
only at low levels or only occasionally, but 
even such occurrences warrant consideration 
because of the potential for growth and toxin 
production. 
Pathogenic bacteria may also be introduced 
during processing, from the air, unclean 
hands, insanitary utensils and equipment, 
unsafe water, and sewage. Well-designed 
sanitation programs will minimize the 
introduction of pathogens. Such sanitation 
controls need not be part of your HACCP 
plan if they are monitored under your 
sanitation program (prerequisite program). 
In most cases, it is not reasonable to assume 
that they will fully prevent the introduction 
of bacterial pathogens. For this reason, you 
should consider it reasonably likely that 
low numbers of pathogenic bacteria will be 
present in the product. 
2.	 Can unsafe levels of pathogenic bacteria that 
were introduced at an earlier processing step be 
eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level at 
this processing step? 
Pathogenic bacteria survival through cooking 
or pasteurization should also be considered 
a significant hazard at any processing step 
where a preventive measure is, or can be, 
used to eliminate the hazard (or reduce the 
likelihood of its occurrence to an acceptable 
level) if it is reasonably likely to occur. The 
preventive measure that can be applied 
for pathogenic bacteria survival through 
cooking and pasteurization is proper design 
and control of the cooking or pasteurization 
process. 
•	 
Intended use 
Because cooked or pasteurized products are 
ready to eat, it is unlikely that the intended use 
will affect the significance of the hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for the survival 
of pathogenic bacteria through cooking or 
pasteurization: 
Will the finished product be pasteurized in the final 
container? 
1.	 If the finished product will be pasteurized in 
the final container, you should identify the 
pasteurization step as the CCP. In this case, you 
would not need to identify the cooking step as 
a CCP for the hazard of pathogenic bacteria 
survival through cooking. 
Example: 
A crabmeat processor cooks, picks, 
packs, and pasteurizes the crabmeat. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
320 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The processor sets the CCP for pathogenic 
bacteria survival through cooking and 
pasteurization at the pasteurization step 
and does not identify the cooking step as 
a CCP for this hazard. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example - Cooking and Pasteurization.” 
2.	 If the product will not be pasteurized, you should 
identify the cooking step as the CCP. 
This control approach is the same as the 
one above and is a control strategy also 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example - Cooking and Pasteurization.” For 
products in reduced oxygen packaging for 
which the cooking process does not target 
C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic 
types B and F, see Chapter 13 for additional 
guidance. 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides a control 
strategy for survival of pathogenic bacteria 
through cooking or pasteurization. You may 
select a control strategy that is different from that 
which is suggested, provided it complies with the 
requirements of the applicable food safety laws 
and regulations. 
The following is an example of the control 
strategy included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO MAY APPLY TO 
CONTROL STRATEGY PRIMARY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR PROCESSOR 
Cooking and pasteurization  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - COOKING AND 
PASTEURIZATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The minimum or maximum values for the 
critical factors established by a scientific 
study. These may include length of the 
cook or pasteurization cycle (speed of the 
belt for a continuous cooker or pasteurizer), 
temperature of the steam or water used 
for cooking or pasteurization (or visual 
observation of minutes at a boil for cooking), 
initial temperature of the product, container 
size (e.g., can dimensions, pouch thickness), 
and product formulation. Other critical 
factors that affect the rate of heating of the 
product may also be established by the 
study; 
OR  
•	 The EPIPT, established by a scientific 
study. Other critical factors that affect the 
rate of heating of the product may also be 
established by the study. 
Note: EPIPT monitoring may not be an option when the objective 
is control of C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types B and F 
spores. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The critical factors established by a scientific 
study. These may include length of the cook 
or pasteurization cycle (speed of the belt 
for a continuous cooker or pasteurizer) and 
temperature of the steam or water used 
for cooking or pasteurization (or visual 
observation of minutes at a boil for cooking), 
initial temperature of the product, container 
size (e.g., can dimensions, pouch thickness), 
and product formulation; 
OR 
•	 The EPIPT. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
For batch cooking or pasteurization equipment: 
•	 For  cooking or pasteurization temperature:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer).  
The device should be installed where 
it measures the coldest temperature of 
the cooking equipment (cold spot to be 
determined by a study). Where cooking 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
321 
 
is performed at the boiling point, visual 
observation of minutes at a boil may be 
an acceptable alternative; 
AND 
•	 For the start and end of each cooking or 
pasteurization cycle:
  
°  Visual observation;
 
AND 
•	 For other critical factors: 
°  Use equipment appropriate to the critical
factor (e.g., initial temperature with a 
temperature-indicating device, (e.g., a 
thermometer); 
OR 
•	 For the EPIPT: 
°  Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer). 
For continuous cooking or pasteurization  
equipment:  
•	 For  cooking or pasteurization temperature:  
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer).  
The device should be installed where 
it measures the coldest temperature of 
the cooking equipment (cold spot to 
be determined by a study). Because 
of the extended time of operation of 
such equipment, it is unlikely that 
visual observation of boiling will be an 
acceptable alternative, even if cooking is 
performed at the boiling point; 
AND 
•	 For cooking or pasteurization time, use: 
°  A stopwatch or tachometer to monitor 
the speed of the belt drive wheel; 
OR 
°  A stopwatch to monitor the time 
necessary for a test unit or belt marking 
to pass through the equipment; 
AND 
•	 For other critical factors: 
°  Use equipment appropriate to the critical
factor (e.g., initial temperature with a 
temperature-indicating device, (e.g., a 
thermometer); 
OR 
•	 For the EPIPT: 
°  Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer). 
» How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
For batch cooking or pasteurization equipment: 
•	 For cooking or pasteurization temperature:  
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per batch; 
AND 
•	 For the start and end of each cooking or 
pasteurization cycle:
  
°  Each batch;
AND 
•	 For other critical factors: 
°  With sufficient frequency to achieve 
control; 
OR
 
•	 For the EPIPT: 
°  Each batch.
For continuous cooking or pasteurization  
equipment:  
•	 For cooking or pasteurization temperature:  
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per day; 
AND 
•	 For cooking or pasteurization time:  
°  At least once per day, and whenever any 
changes in belt speed are made;
 
AND
 
•	 For other critical factors: 
°  With sufficient frequency to achieve 
control; 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
322 
 
OR 
•	 For the EPIPT: 
°  At least every 30 minutes, and whenever 
any changes in product-heating critical 
factors occur. 
»	 Who Will Perform the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous temperature-recording  
devices:  
°  Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.  The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
AND 
•	 For other monitoring:  
°  Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Recook or repasteurize the product; 
OR 
•	 Chill and hold the product for an evaluation 
of the adequacy of the cooking or 
pasteurization process. If the product has 
not received an adequate process, it should 
be destroyed, diverted to a non-food use, or 
recooked or repasteurized;  
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert 
improperly cooked or pasteurized shrimp to 
a shrimp canning operation); 
OR 
•	 Destroy the product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Adjust the steam supply to increase the 
processing temperature;  
OR 
•	 Extend the length of the cooking or 
pasteurization  cycle to compensate for a 
temperature drop, using a process developed 
by a process authority; 
OR 
•	 Process at a higher temperature to 
compensate for a low initial temperature, 
using a process developed by a process 
authority;  
OR 
•	 Adjust the belt speed. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
For batch cooking or pasteurization equipment: 
•	 For temperature monitoring: 
°  Record of continuous temperature 
monitoring;
 
AND
 
°  Record of visual checks of recorded data;
 
OR 
•	 Cooking log that indicates visual observation 
of boiling, where cooking is performed at 
the boiling point; 
AND 
•	 Record of notation of the start time and end  
time of the cooking or pasteurization periods;  
AND 
•	 Records that are appropriate for the  
other critical factors (e.g., a cooking or  
pasteurization log that indicates the initial  
temperature); 
OR 
•	 Record of EPIPT results. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
323 
For continuous cooking or pasteurization  
equipment: 
•	 Record of continuous temperature monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of visual checks of devices; 
AND 
•	 Cooking or pasteurization log that indicates 
the RPM of the belt drive wheel or the time 
necessary for a test unit or belt marking to 
pass through the tank; 
AND 
•	 Records that are appropriate for the other 
critical factors (e.g., a cooking or pasteurization  
log that indicates the initial temperature); 
OR 
•	 Record of EPIPT results. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
For cooking, process validation study (process  
establishment):  
•	 The adequacy of the cooking process 
should be established by a scientific study. It 
should be designed to ensure an appropriate 
reduction in the number of pathogenic 
bacteria of public health concern. Selecting 
the target organism is critical. In most cases, 
it will be a relatively heat-tolerant vegetative 
pathogen, such as L. monocytogenes. 
However, in some cases where outgrowth 
of spore-forming pathogens, such as 
Clostridium perfringens and  Bacillus cereus, 
during the post-cook cooling step must be 
prevented by eliminating these pathogens  
during the cook step (e.g., because cooling 
after cooking is not controlled (see 
Chapter 12)), then they will be the target 
organisms. Additionally, when cooking is 
performed immediately before reduced  
oxygen packaging (e.g., vacuum packaging 
or modified atmosphere packaging), for 
a product that will be marketed under 
refrigeration, it may be necessary for the 
cooking process to be sufficient to eliminate 
the spores of C. botulinum type E and non
proteolytic types B and F. This is the case 
when the product does not contain other 
barriers that are sufficient to prevent growth 
and toxin formation by this pathogen (e.g., 
refrigerated, vacuum packaged hot-filled 
soups and sauces). Generally, a 6D process 
is suitable, regardless of the target bacterial 
pathogen. However, lower degrees of 
destruction may be acceptable if supported 
by a scientific study of the normal levels in 
the food. Tables A-3 and A-4 provide 6D 
process times for a range of internal product 
temperatures, with L. monocytogenes  and  C.  
botulinum  type B (the most heat-resistant 
form of non-proteolytic C. botulinum) as 
the target pathogens. The values provided 
in Table A-4 may not be sufficient for the 
destruction of C. botulinum type E and 
non-proteolytic types B and F in products 
containing dungeness crabmeat because of 
the potential protective effect of naturally 
occurring substances, such as lysozyme. 
Expert knowledge of thermal process  
calculations and the dynamics of heat transfer  
in processing equipment may be required  
to establish such a cooking process. Such  
knowledge can be obtained by education or  
experience, or both. Conducting a validation  
study for cooking processes may require  
access to suitable facilities and the application  
of recognized methods. The cooking  
equipment should be designed, operated,  
and maintained to deliver the established  
process to every unit of the product. In some  
cases, thermal death time, heat penetration,  
temperature distribution, and inoculated  
pack studies may be necessary to validate  
the minimum process. In many cases,  
establishing the minimum process may be  
simplified by repetitively determining the  
process needed to reach an internal product  
temperature that will ensure the inactivation  
of all vegetative bacterial pathogens of public  
health concern under the most difficult  
heating conditions likely to be encountered  
­
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
324 
during processing. In other instances,  
existing literature or federal, state, or local  
regulations that establish minimum processes  
or adequacy of equipment are available.  
Characteristics of the process, product, and/ 
or equipment that affect the ability of the  
established minimum cooking process should  
be taken into consideration in the validation  
of the process. A record of the process  
validation study should be maintained;  
OR 
For pasteurization, process validation study  
(process establishment):  
•	 The adequacy of the pasteurization process 
should be established by a scientific study. It 
should be designed to ensure an appropriate 
reduction in the number of target bacterial 
pathogens. Selecting the target organism 
is critical. In most cases, it will be the 
spores of C. botulinum type E and non
proteolytic types B and F. In some cases 
(e.g., products that are distributed frozen 
or contain other barriers to prevent growth 
and toxin formation by C. botulinum type 
E and non-proteolytic types B and F), the 
process will target another pathogen, such 
as L. monocytogenes.  Generally, a 6D process 
is suitable, regardless of the target pathogen. 
However, lower degrees of destruction may 
be acceptable if supported by a scientific 
study of the normal levels in the food. Tables 
A-3 and A-4 provide 6D process times for 
a range of internal product temperatures, 
with L. monocytogenes  and  C. botulinum 
type B (the most heat-resistant form of 
non-proteolytic C. botulinum) as the target 
pathogens. The values provided in Table A-4 
may not be sufficient for the destruction of C.  
botulinum type E and non-proteolytic types 
B and F in products containing dungeness 
crabmeat because of the potential protective 
effect of naturally occurring substances, such 
as lysozyme. 
Expert knowledge of thermal process  
calculations and the dynamics of heat transfer  
­
in processing equipment may be required to  
determine the target bacterial pathogen and  
to establish a pasteurization process. Such  
knowledge can be obtained by education  
or experience, or both. Conducting a  
validation study for pasteurization processes  
may require access to suitable facilities and  
the application of recognized methods.  
The pasteurization equipment should be  
designed, operated, and maintained to  
deliver the established process to every  
unit of the product. In some cases, thermal  
death time, heat penetration, temperature  
distribution, and inoculated pack studies  
may be necessary to validate the minimum  
process. In other instances, existing literature  
or federal, state, or local regulations that  
establish minimum processes or adequacy  
of equipment are available. Characteristics  
of the process, product, and/or equipment  
that affect the adequacy of the established  
minimum pasteurization process should be  
taken into consideration in the validation of  
the process. A record of the validation study  
should be maintained;  
AND 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature-recording  
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected. This check can be 
accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water  
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used  
at or near the boiling point (note that  
the temperature should be adjusted to  
compensate for altitude, when necessary); 
OR 
°  A combination of the above if the 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
325 
device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature reading 
on the device with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a thermometer traceable to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
steam temperature, water temperature,  
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations. Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time. In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks. The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer. Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions  
of use of the device. Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration or 
the need to replace the device (perhaps with 
a more durable device). Devices subjected to 
high temperatures for extended periods of 
time may require more frequent calibration. 
Calibration should be performed at a 
minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate other instruments as necessary to 
ensure their accuracy; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
326 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
327 
TABLE 16-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - COOKING AND PASTEURIZATION
(COOKING MODEL)
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example - Cooking and Pasteurization (Cooking Model).”  This example illustrates how a
processor of wild-caught cooked shrimp can control cooking using a continuous steam cooker.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  
Pathogenic bacteria survival through cooking and pasteurization may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) 
for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation during processing, food and color 
additives, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Cooking Pathogenic 
bacteria 
survival 
Minimum
cook time: 2.5 
minutes 
Length of the 
cook cycle 
Belt speed
measurement
with stopwatch 
Once per day 
and after any 
adjustment 
Cooker 
operator 
Extend process 
or elevate 
temperature 
to compensate
for deviation 
from critical
limit, based 
on alternate 
processes
provided by 
the process
authority
Chill and hold
for evaluation 
Cooking
record 
Scientific study establishing
the thermal process 
(process
validation)
Check the
data logger for 
accuracy and 
damage and to ensure that
it is operational 
before putting 
into operation; check it 
daily, at the beginning of 
operations; and calibrate it 
once per year
Calibrate the scale monthly
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action and 
verification,  records within
1 week of 
preparation 
Minimum cook
temperature: 
210°F
Note:  To 
achieve a 6D 
reduction of L.
monocytogenes 
Temperature 
of steam in
the cooker 
Digital time and
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per day 
Cooker 
operator 
Data logger
printout 
Maximum
shrimp size: 40
count/pound 
Shrimp size Scale Hourly and
after every 
raw material 
lot change
or grader 
adjustment 
Grader operator Grading 
record 
*Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process. 
  
 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
328 
TABLE 16-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - COOKING AND PASTEURIZATION
(PASTEURIZATION MODEL)
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example - Cooking and Pasteurization (Pasteurization Model).”  This example illustrates how
a processor of pasteurized, refrigerated blue crabmeat can control pasteurization. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  
Pathogenic bacteria survival through cooking and pasteurization may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for 
other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation during processing, recontamination after 
pasteurization, and metal fragments). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Batch
pasteurization 
Pathogenic 
bacteria 
survival 
Minimum
initial
product 
temperature: 
37°F 
Initial
temperature 
Dial
thermometer 
Coldest
can entering
each batch 
Pasteurizer
operator 
Extend the
process or
elevate the 
temperature 
to compensate
for 
deviation 
from the
critical
limit
Segregate
and hold for 
evaluation 
Pasteurization 
log 
Process
establishment
Check the
temperature- 
recording device and 
dial thermometer for 
accuracy and damage 
and to ensure that they 
are operational before 
putting into operation; 
check it daily, at the 
beginning of operations; 
and calibrate it once per 
year
Review 
monitoring,
verification, and 
corrective action records 
within 1 week of 
preparation 
Minimum
length of 
pasteurization
cycle: 
120 minutes 
Time up to 
189°F and
time cycle 
ends 
Temperature- 
recording
device 
Each batch Pasteurizer
operator 
Pasteurization 
log 
Minimum
water bath 
temperature: 
189°F 
Temperature
of water bath 
Temperature- 
recording
device 
Continuously,
with visual
check at end
of batch 
Recorder 
thermometer,
with visual
check by 
pasteurizer
operator 
Recorder 
thermometer 
chart 
*Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday. As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Cockey, R. R., and M. C. Tatro. 1974. Survival 
studies with spores of Clostridium botulinum 
type E in pasteurized meat of the blue crab 
Callinectes sapidus. Appl. Microbiol. 27:629-633. 
•	 European Chilled Food Federation. 1997. 
Guidelines for good hygienic practice in the 
manufacture of chilled foods. 
•	 Frazier, J. 2005. Establishing or verifying a 
heat process for cooked, ready-to-eat seafood 
products, and heat process monitoring 
considerations under HACCP. 2nd ed. 
Grocery Manufacturers Association (Food 
Products Association), Washington, DC. 
•	 Hilderbrand, K. S., Jr. 1996. Personal 
communication. Oregon State University, 
Extension Service, Corvallis, OR. 
•	 Lum, K. C. 1996. Personal communication. 
National Food Processors Association, 
Seattle, WA. 
•	 Lynt, R. K., D. A. Kautter, and H. M. 
Solomon. 1982. Differences and similarities 
among proteolytic and nonproteolytic strains 
of Clostridium botulinum types A, B, E and 
F: a review. J. Food Prot. 45:466-474. 
•	 Lynt, R. K., H. M. Solomon, T. Lilly, and 
D. A. Kautter. 1977. Thermal death time of 
Clostridium botulinum type E in meat of the 
blue crab. J. Food Sci. 42:1022-1025. 
•	 Mackey, B. M., and N. Bratchell. 1989. The 
heat resistance of Listeria monocytogenes: a 
review. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 9:89-94. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1990. 
Recommendations of the National Advisory 
Committee on Microbiological Criteria for 
Foods for Cooked Ready-to-Eat Shrimp and 
Cooked Ready-to-Eat Crabmeat. Executive 
Secretariat, Food Safety and Inspection 
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1990. 
Recommendations of the National Advisory 
Committee on Microbiological Criteria for 
Foods for Refrigerated Foods Containing 
Cooked, Uncured Meat or Poultry Products 
that are Packaged for Extended Refrigerated 
Shelf Life and that are Ready-to-Eat or 
Prepared with Little or No Additional Heat 
Treatment. Executive Secretariat, Food Safety 
and Inspection Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Washington, DC. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1991. 
Listeria monocytogenes: recommendations 
of the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods for 
Refrigerated Foods. Intl. J. Food Microbiol. 
14:185-246. 
•	 Peterson, M. E., G. A. Pelroy, F. T. Poysky, R. 
N. Paranjpye, R. M. Dong, G. M. Pigott, and M. 
W. Eklund. 1997. Heat-pasteurization process 
for inactivation of nonproteolytic types of 
Clostridium botulinum in picked dungeness 
crabmeat. J. Food Prot. 60:928-934. 
•	 Peterson, M. E., R. N. Paranjpye, F. T. 
Poysky, G. A. Pelroy, and M. W. Eklund. 
2002. Control of nonproteolytic Clostridium 
botulinum types B and E in crab analogs 
by combinations of heat pasteurization and 
water phase salt. J. Food Prot. 65:130-139. 
•	 Rippen, T., C. Hackney, G. Flick, G. Knobl, 
and D. Ward. 1993. Seafood pasteurization 
and minimal processing manual. Virginia 
Cooperative Extension Publication 600­
0061. Virginia Sea Grant Publication VSG 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
329 
93-09. Virginia Seafood Research and  
Extension Center Publication VPI-SG-93-01.  
Blacksburg, VA. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration and  
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2003.  
Quantitative assessment of the relative risk  
to public health from foodborne Listeria  
monocytogenes among selected categories  
of ready-to-eat foods. http://www.fda. 
gov/Food/ScienceResearch/ResearchAreas/ 
RiskAssessmentSafetyAssessment/ucm183966. 
htm. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Thermally processed low-acid foods 
packaged in hermetically sealed containers. 
In Code of Federal Regulations, 21 CFR 
113. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC. 
CHAPTER 16: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Cooking or Pasteurization 
330 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain 
Raw Product Characteristics 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
The survival of pathogenic bacteria through 
processes designed to retain raw product 
characteristics can cause consumer illness. 
The primary pathogens of concern are 
Vibrio vulnificus (V. vulnificus) and Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus (V. parahaemolyticus).  See 
Appendix 7 for a description of the public health 
impacts of these pathogens. 
•	 
Goal of processes designed to retain raw 
product characteristics 
Some processes are designed to reduce specific 
pathogens to acceptable levels while retaining 
the sensory qualities (appearance, taste, and 
texture) of the raw product.  These processes 
are particularly useful in addressing the hazard 
associated with the target pathogen in raw 
products such as raw molluscan shellfish (i.e., 
oysters, clams, mussels, and whole and roe-on 
scallops) that are intended for the raw ready-
to-eat market.  Because these processes do not 
eliminate all pathogens of public health concern, 
they are not considered cooking or pasteurization 
processes.  Finished products in which the raw 
sensory qualities are not maintained are covered 
in Chapter 16, “Pathogenic Bacteria Survival 
Through Cooking and Pasteurization.” 
Examples of processes designed to retain raw 
product characteristics include: 
•	 High hydrostatic pressure processing (HPP); 
•	 Individual quick freezing (IQF) with extended 
frozen storage; 
•	 Mild heat processing; 
•	 Irradiation. 
HPP, IQF with extended frozen storage, mild heat 
processing, and irradiation are processes currently 
used for the treatment of raw molluscan shellfish 
to reduce the presence of V. vulnificus and V. 
parahaemolyticus to non-detectable levels. V. 
vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus are naturally 
occurring pathogens (i.e., not associated with 
human or animal sources) that may be present in 
fish and fishery products, and in particular, raw 
molluscan shellfish.  Non-detectable for these 
pathogens is defined under the National Shellfish 
Sanitation Program (NSSP) as less than 30 (MPN)/ 
gram.  MPN means most probable number and it 
is an approximation of the bacterial population in 
analyzed product.  Shellfish that are processed in 
a manner that achieves a non-detectable level for 
one or both of these pathogens may bear “added 
safety” labeling.  Additionally, they need not meet 
the time from exposure to air (e.g., by harvest or 
receding tide) to refrigeration recommendations 
specific to V. vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus 
described in Chapter 4. 
These processes also may have application to 
pathogens other than Vibrio spp. and to products 
other than raw molluscan shellfish, but such 
applications are not presently in commercial use 
in the U.S. fish and fishery products industry. 
Control of pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
formation during storage of these products may be 
important to their safety because: 
•	 Pathogens that are more resistant than the 
target pathogen(s) may survive the process; 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
331 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
•	 These processes may reduce the number  
of spoilage bacteria in the food, reducing  
competition for any surviving pathogenic  
bacteria. 
Strategies for controlling pathogenic bacteria  
growth and toxin formation are included in  
Chapter 12 (for pathogens other than Clostridium  
botulinum (C. botulinum)) and Chapter 13 (for  
C. botulinum). 
•	 High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing (HPP) 
HPP is the application of hydrostatic compression 
in the range of 14,500 to 145,000 pound per 
square inch (100 to 1,000 megapascal (MPa)). 
These pressures are capable of inactivating 
pressure-sensitive pathogens, especially 
vegetative forms.  Some pathogens are more 
sensitive to pressure than are others.  For 
example, V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus 
are particularly sensitive.  However, HPP appears 
to have limited effect against bacterial spores 
like C. botulinum unless combined with other 
treatments, such as heat and acidity (pH). 
The effectiveness of the process is dependent 
upon the amount of pressure applied, the 
process temperature, and the duration of the 
process.  However other organoleptic changes, 
such as texture, viscous liquor and a “plumper” 
appearance have been reported. Additionally, 
the pressure facilitates oyster adductor muscle 
changes; hence, HPP may result in a shucked 
oyster. 
•	 
Individual quick freezing (IQF) with 
extended frozen storage 
IQF involves the use of cryogenic or blast 
freezing technology to rapidly lower the product 
temperature below freezing.  This process results 
in a reduction in the number of freeze-sensitive 
pathogens.  Some pathogens are more sensitive 
to freezing than are others.  For example, V. 
parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus are especially 
sensitive.  To reduce V. parahaemolyticus and/ 
or V. vulnificus to non-detectable levels, the IQF 
process is followed by a period of frozen storage, 
which may vary depending on organism. 
•	 
Mild heat processing 
Mild heat processing involves submerging the 
product first in a hot water bath for a prescribed 
time period followed by dipping it in an ice 
water bath.  This process results in a reduction 
in the number of heat-sensitive pathogens.  Some 
pathogens are more sensitive to heat than are 
others. V. parahaemolyticus and V. vulnificus are 
especially sensitive. 
•	 
Irradiation 
Ionizing radiation (i.e., irradiation) is used to 
eliminate or reduce the numbers of bacterial 
pathogens, parasites, and insects in food.  It 
can also be used to delay physiological 
processes (e.g., ripening) in fruit and vegetables. 
Acceptable sources of ionizing radiation in 
the United States include:  gamma rays from 
sealed units of the radionuclides cobalt-60 and 
cesium-137; electrons generated by machine 
sources (at energies not exceeding 10 million 
electron volts); and, x-rays generated by machine 
sources (at energies not exceeding 5 or 7.5 
million electron volts, depending on the target 
material as set forth in 21 CFR 179.26 (a)). 
FDA has approved the use of ionizing radiation 
for the control of V. parahaemolyticus and V. 
vulnificus and other foodborne pathogens in 
fresh or frozen molluscan shellfish.  Mandatory 
irradiation controls are described in the 
Irradiation in the Production, Processing and 
Handling of Food regulation (21 CFR 179). 
Irradiation of fresh and frozen molluscan 
shellfish may not exceed an absorbed dose of 5.5 
kilograys (kGy) (21 CFR 179.26(b)). 
Some pathogens are more sensitive to ionizing 
radiation than are others.  V. parahaemolyticus 
and V. vulnificus are highly sensitive, whereas 
Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes (L. 
monocytogenes) are more resistant.  Bacterial 
spores (e.g., C. botulinum) are more resistant to 
ionizing radiation than are bacterial vegetative 
cells (e.g., L. monocytogenes). 
The effectiveness of the process is determined 
by the amount of the ionizing radiation absorbed 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
332 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the food.  The amount of ionizing radiation 
absorbed depends on factors associated with 
the irradiator itself, for example, activity (energy 
output) of the source (e.g., x-ray intensity and 
electron or photon energy spectrum), source 
geometry (configuration or relationship between 
the product and the source), source-to-product 
distance, process path through the irradiator, 
and beam characteristics.  The amount of 
absorption also depends on factors associated 
with the specific process, for example, length of 
time irradiated, conveyor speed, environmental 
temperature, product temperature, product 
composition and density, packaging size, shape 
and composition, and configuration of the load 
of product in the irradiator.  It is important 
that every part of the product receive the 
prescribed absorbed dose within a specified 
range.  Dosimetry mapping is used to document 
the distribution of absorbed dose throughout 
a process load for a particular set of irradiator 
parameters.  All factors listed above should be 
considered in the establishment of the process 
and its verification.  The parameters that could 
affect the absorbed dose should be monitored. 
A suitable dosimetry system should be used to 
verify the range of absorbed dose delivered to 
each lot of product. 
•	 
Control of processes intended to retain raw 
product characteristics 
Controlling pathogenic bacteria survival through 
processes intended to retain raw product 
characteristics is accomplished by: 
•	 Scientifically establishing and validating a  
process that will reduce the target pathogen(s)  
to an acceptable level (the scientific study may  
be conducted by the processor or obtained  
from scientific literature);  
•	 Designing and operating the processing 
equipment so that every unit of the product 
receives at least the established minimum 
process; 
•	 Continuously monitoring the critical process 
parameters to verify achievement of a 
scientifically established process. 
If “added safety” labeling is to be used on the 
product or if the process is used as a substitute for 
the time from exposure to air (e.g., by harvest or 
receding tide) to refrigeration recommendations 
specific to V. vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus 
described in Chapter 4, the ability of a process to 
reliably achieve the appropriate reduction of the 
target pathogen should be validated by a scientific 
study approved by the shellfish control authority 
with concurrence from FDA.  A scientific study is 
conducted to initially validate the efficacy of the 
process and to revalidate it when there has been a 
change in the process.  Additional guidance on the 
conduct of a validation study can be found in the 
“National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish 2007 Revision.” 
•	 
Strategies for control of pathogens 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogens in fish and fishery products.  They 
include: 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by processes 
that retain the raw product characteristics 
(covered in this chapter); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by cooking 
or pasteurizing (covered in Chapter 16) 
or by retorting (covered by the Thermally 
Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in 
Hermetically Sealed Containers regulation, 21 
CFR 113, called the Low-Acid Canned Foods 
Regulation in this guidance document); 
•	 Managing the amount of time that food is 
exposed to temperatures that are favorable 
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
production (covered generally in Chapter  
12; for C. botulinum, in Chapter 13; and for 
Staphylococcus aureus in hydrated batter 
mixes, in Chapter 15); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
333 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the level of pH in the product 
(covered by the Acidified Foods regulation, 
21 CFR 114 for shelf-stable acidified products, 
and by Chapter 13 for refrigerated acidified 
products); 
•	 Controlling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide) to refrigeration in 
order to control pathogens from the harvest 
area (covered in Chapter 4); 
•	 Controlling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
(covered in Chapter 18).  
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in  
determining whether pathogenic bacteria survival  
through processes designed to retain raw  
product characteristics is a significant hazard at a  
processing step: 
1.	  Is it reasonably likely that unsafe levels of 
pathogenic bacteria will be introduced at this 
processing step (do unsafe levels of pathogenic 
bacteria come in with the raw material or will the 
process introduce unsafe levels of pathogens)? 
Under ordinary circumstances, it would be  
reasonably likely that an unsafe level of  
V. vulnificus could enter the process from  
oysters harvested from states that have been  
confirmed as the original source of oysters  
associated with two or more V. vulnificus  
illnesses (e.g., states bordering the Gulf of  
Mexico). 
Under ordinary circumstances, it would be  
reasonably likely that an unsafe level of V.  
parahaemolyticus could enter the process  
from oysters harvested from an area that  
meets any one of the following conditions:  
•	 The shellfish control authority 
has conducted a risk evaluation 
and determined that the risk of V.  
parahaemolyticus illness from the 
consumption of oysters harvested 
from that growing area is reasonably 
likely to occur.  Specific guidance 
for determining risk can be found 
in the “National Shellfish Sanitation 
Program Guide for the Control of 
Molluscan Shellfish 2007 Revision”; 
•	 The shellfish control authority has 
determined that harvesting occurs in the 
growing area at a time when average 
monthly daytime water temperatures 
exceed 60°F for waters bordering the 
Pacific Ocean and 81°F for waters 
bordering the Gulf of Mexico and 
the Atlantic Ocean (New Jersey and 
south), except where a more rigorous 
risk evaluation has led the shellfish 
control authority to conclude that the 
risk of V. parahaemolyticus illness 
from the consumption of oysters 
harvested from that growing area 
is not reasonably likely to occur; 
•	 The waters of the state have been 
confirmed as the original source 
of oysters associated with two 
or more V. parahaemolyticus  
illnesses in the past 3 years. 
2.	  Can unsafe levels of pathogenic bacteria that 
were introduced at an earlier processing step be 
eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level at 
this processing step? 
Pathogenic bacteria survival through processes  
designed to retain raw product characteristics  
should also be considered a significant hazard  
at any processing step where a preventive  
measure is, or can be, used to eliminate  
the hazard (or reduce the likelihood of its  
occurrence to an acceptable level) if it is  
reasonably likely to occur.  The preventive  
measure that can be applied for pathogenic  
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
334 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bacteria survival through processes designed 
to retain raw product characteristics is proper 
design and control of the process. 
•	 
Intended use 
The controls for V. vulnificus and V. 
parahaemolyticus that are discussed in this 
chapter are only intended to be applied to 
oysters if they are intended for raw consumption. 
You should assume that most oysters will be 
consumed raw.  However, controls need not 
be applied to oyster shellstock if tags on the 
containers of shellstock indicate that they must 
be shucked before consumption. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in  
determining whether a processing step is a  
critical control point (CCP) for pathogenic  
bacteria survival through processes designed to  
retain raw product characteristics: 
1.	  If the finished product is raw oyster shellstock 
intended for raw consumption, will it be subjected 
to a process in your facility that is designed to 
retain raw product characteristics (e.g., mild 
heat processed, IQF with extended frozen 
storage, high hydrostatic pressure processed, or 
irradiated) and is sufficient to reduce V. vulnificus  
or V. parahaemolyticus to acceptable levels (i.e., 
reduced to a non-detectable level, less than 30 
MPN/gram)? 
a.	  
If the finished product will be subjected 
to a process designed to retain raw 
product characteristics, you should 
identify that processing step as the CCP 
for the target pathogen.  In this case, you 
would not need to identify the receiving 
step as a CCP for the control of the target 
pathogen.  However, you may need to 
identify the receiving step as a CCP for 
control of other non-target pathogens 
(e.g.,  Salmonella spp. and norovirus), as 
described in Chapter 4.  
This control approach includes two  
control strategies referred to in this chapter  
as “Control Strategy Example 1 - High  
Hydrostatic Pressure Processing
,” or  
“Control Strategy Example 2 - IQF With  
Extended Frozen Storage.”  For guidance  
on controls for mild heat processing, see  
“Control Strategy Example 1 - Cooking and  
Pasteurization,” in Chapter 16; however,  
guidance on process validation for mild  
heat processing is more appropriately  
obtained from “Control Strategy Example 1  
- High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing,” in  
this chapter.  No specific guidance is given  
on control of irradiation. 
b.	  If the product will not be subjected to a 
process in your facility that is designed 
to retain raw product characteristics 
and is sufficient to reduce V. vulnificus 
or V. parahaemolyticus to acceptable 
levels, you should identify the receiving 
step as the CCP for V. vulnificus and/ 
or V. parahaemolyticus, as appropriate.   
Guidance for development of this control 
strategy is provided in Chapter 4.  
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides two control 
strategies for pathogenic bacteria survival 
through processes designed to retain raw product 
characteristics.  You may select a control strategy 
that is different from those which are suggested, 
provided it complies with the requirements of the 
applicable food safety laws and regulations. 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO MAY APPLY TO 
CONTROL STRATEGY PRIMARY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR PROCESSOR 
High hydrostatic pressure 
processing  
IQF with extended frozen 
storage 
 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
335 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - HIGH 
HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE PROCESSING 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 The minimum or maximum values for the 
critical factors established by conducting a 
scientific study to validate the process (e.g., 
minimum pressure, minimum hold time at 
pressure, and minimum initial temperature of 
the product).  
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 Pressure; 
AND 
•	 Hold time at pressure; 
AND 
•	 Initial temperature of the product; 
AND 
•	 Other critical factors that affect the 
effectiveness of the process, as specified by 
the study (e.g., pressurization time (step-up 
time), decompression time (step-down time),  
and treatment temperature). 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For  time and pressure: 
°  Use a continuous pressure-recording
device (e.g., a pressure recorder);
 
AND
 
•	 For initial temperature of the product: 
°  Use a temperature-indicating device (e.g.,  
a thermometer);
 
AND
 
•	 For other critical limits: 
°  Use equipment appropriate to the critical
limit.  
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For time and pressure: 
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per batch; 
AND 
•	 For initial temperature of the product: 
°  Each batch;
AND 
•	 For other critical factors: 
°  With sufficient frequency to achieve 
control. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For continuous-recording devices:  
°  Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
AND 
•	 For other checks: 
°  Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Reprocess the product; 
OR 
•	 Chill and hold the product for an evaluation 
of the adequacy of the high hydrostatic 
pressure process.  If the product has not 
received an adequate high hydrostatic 
pressure process, the product should be 
destroyed, diverted to a non-food use, or 
reprocessed; 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a use in which the 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
336 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert the 
improperly processed product to a canning 
operation); 
OR 
•	 Destroy the product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a non-food use or a 
use without the “added safety” labeling. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Adjust or repair the processing equipment; 
AND/OR 
•	 Extend the high hydrostatic pressure process 
to compensate for a pressure drop, using a 
process established by a scientific study. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record of continuous pressure monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of visual checks of recorded data; 
AND 
•	 Record of visual observations of initial 
temperature of product; 
AND 
•	 Records that are appropriate for other critical 
limit monitoring. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Process validation study: 
°  The adequacy of the high hydrostatic 
pressure treatment should be validated 
by conducting a scientific study.  It 
should be designed to ensure an 
appropriate reduction in the number 
of the target pathogen(s).  In the case 
of V. vulnificus or V. parahaemolyticus, 
it should be designed to reduce the 
presence of these pathogens  to non-
detectable levels.  Non-detectable for 
these pathogens is defined under the 
NSSP as less than 30 MPN/gram.  If 
“added safety” labeling is to be used 
on the product or if the process is 
used as a substitute for the time from 
exposure to air (e.g., by harvest or 
receding tide) to refrigeration limitations 
described in Chapter 4, the ability 
of a post-harvest process to reliably 
achieve the appropriate reduction of 
the target pathogen should be validated 
by a study approved by the shellfish 
control authority with concurrence 
from FDA.  A study is used to initially 
validate the efficacy of the process and 
to revalidate it when there has been 
a change in the process.  Additional 
guidance on conducting a validation 
study can be found in the “National 
Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish 2007 
Revision” (http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
FoodSafety/Product-SpecificInformation/ 
Seafood/FederalStatePrograms/ 
NationalShellfishSanitationProgram/ 
ucm046353.htm). 
Expert knowledge of high hydrostatic  
pressure process calculations may be  
required to validate a high hydrostatic  
pressure process.  Such knowledge can  
be obtained by education or experience,  
or both.  Validating high hydrostatic  
pressure processes may require access  
to suitable facilities and the application  
of recognized methods.  The equipment  
should be designed, operated, and  
maintained to deliver the established  
process to every unit of the product.   
In some instances, inoculated pack  
studies may be necessary to validate the  
minimum process.  In other instances,  
existing literature or federal, state, or  
local regulations that establish minimum  
processes or adequacy of equipment  
may be available.  Characteristics of  
the process, product, and/or equipment  
that affect the adequacy of the  
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
337 
established minimum high hydrostatic  
pressure process should be taken into  
consideration in the validation of the  
process.  A record of process validation  
studies should be maintained;  
AND 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) is put into service, check 
the accuracy of the device to verify that the 
factory calibration has not been affected.  
This check can be accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water 
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be 
used at or near the boiling point (note 
that the temperature should be adjusted 
to compensate for altitude, when 
necessary); 
OR 
°  Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature indicated 
by the device with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a thermometer traceable to National 
Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g.,  
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it is 
operational; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating  
device against a known accurate reference 
device (e.g., NIST-traceable thermometer) 
at least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away from 
the actual value (drift) found during checks 
and/or calibration may show a need for more 
frequent calibration or the need to replace 
the device (perhaps with a more durable 
device).  Calibration should be performed at 
a minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Check and calibrate other monitoring 
instruments as necessary to ensure their 
accuracy; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
338 
   
 
 
  
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
339 
TABLE 17-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - HIGH HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE PROCESSING
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing.”  
This example illustrates how a raw oyster processor using a high hydrostatic pressure processor can control pathogen survival through processes designed to retain raw 
product characteristics. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Pathogen survival through processes designed to retain raw product characteristics may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 
3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., pathogens from the harvest area, environmental chemical contaminants, natural toxins, pathogenic bacteria growth and 
toxin formation during processing, food and color additives, and metal fragments).  
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIG­
NIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
High
hydrostatic 
pressure
processing 
V. vulnificus  
survival 
Minimum hold
time: 250 seconds 
Hold time at
pressure 
Pressure-
recording
device 
Continuous,
with visual
check of the
recorded data
once per batch 
Pressure
equipment
operator 
Chill and hold
for evaluation 
Adjust or repair 
equipment as
needed 
Pressure­
recording
device 
printout 
Process validation
Check the dial thermometer 
for accuracy and damage 
and to ensure that it is
operational before putting 
into operation; check it 
daily, at the beginning of 
operations; and calibrate it 
once per year
Review monitoring,
 corrective action, and 
verification records within 
1 week of preparation 
Minimum pressure:  
350 MPa 
Pressure
during the
holding
period 
Pressure-
recording
device 
Continuous,
with visual
check of the
recorded data
once per batch 
Pressure
equipment
operator 
Pressure-
recording
device 
printout 
Minimum initial
temperature of 
product: 60°F 
Initial
temperature 
of product 
Dial
thermometer 
Each batch Pressure
equipment
operator 
Initial
temperature 
log 
*Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process. 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - IQF WITH 
EXTENDED FROZEN STORAGE 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 There are minimum or maximum values for 
the critical factors established by conducting 
a scientific study to validate the process 
(e.g., amount of time to reach frozen state, 
maximum frozen storage temperature and 
minimum time) 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 IQF freezer and product parameters 
critical to ensure that the product internal 
temperature is achieved within the time 
established by the scientific study.  These 
variables may include, but are not limited 
to:  initial product temperature, tunnel air 
temperature, time in tunnel, air velocity, belt 
speed, product moisture, product size, and 
loading pattern; 
AND 
•	 Frozen storage temperature; 
AND 
•	 Length of frozen storage. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 For the IQF freezer:  
°  Use equipment appropriate to the critical
limit (e.g., initial temperature with a 
temperature-indicating device (e.g., a 
thermometer)); 
AND 
•	 For frozen storage temperature: 
°  Use a continuous temperature-recording 
device (e.g., a recording thermometer); 
AND 
•	 For length of frozen storage: 
°  Use a clock.
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 For the IQF freezer:  
°  With sufficient frequency to achieve 
control;
 
AND
 
•	 For frozen storage temperature: 
°  Continuous monitoring, with a visual 
check of the recorded data at least once 
per lot; 
AND 
•	 For length of frozen storage: 
°  Each lot, at the beginning and end of a 
batch. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 For temperature-recording devices:  
°  Monitoring is performed by the device 
itself.   The visual check of the data 
generated by the device, to ensure that 
the critical limits have consistently been 
met, may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature 
of the controls; 
AND 
•	 For other monitoring:  
°  Any person who has an understanding of
the nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Refreeze the product; 
OR 
•	 Hold the product for an evaluation of the 
adequacy of the freezing process.  If the 
product has not received an adequate 
process, it should be destroyed, diverted to 
a non-food use or other appropriate use, or 
refrozen; 
OR 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
340 
•	 Divert the product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert an 
improperly frozen product to a cooking or 
canning operation); 
OR 
•	 Destroy the product; 
OR 
•	 Divert the product to a non-food use or a 
use without the “added safety” labeling. 
AND 
Take the following corrective action to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the IQF 
freezing equipment; 
OR 
•	 Make repairs or adjustments to the frozen 
storage freezer; 
OR 
•	 Move some or all of the product in the 
frozen storage freezer to a properly 
functioning freezer. 
AND/OR 
•	 Extend the freezing cycle or frozen storage 
time period to compensate for a rise in 
temperature, using a process developed by a 
process authority; 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 For the IQF freezer:  
°  Records that are appropriate to the 
monitoring;
 
AND
 
•	 For frozen storage temperature:  
°  Record of continuous temperature 
monitoring;
 
AND
  
•	 For length of frozen storage: 
°  Freezing log with notation of the start 
and end of frozen storage periods. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Process validation study: 
°  The adequacy of the IQF with extended  
frozen storage process should be validated  
by conducting a scientific study.  It should  
be designed to ensure an appropriate  
reduction in the number of the target  
pathogen(s).  In the case of V. vulnificus  
or V. parahaemolyticus, it should be  
designed to reduce the presence of  
these pathogens  to non-detectable levels.   
Non-detectable for these pathogens is  
defined under the NSSP as less than 30  
MPN/gram.  If “added safety” labeling  
is to be used on the product or if the  
process is used as a substitute for the time  
from harvest to refrigeration limitations  
described in Chapter 4, the ability of a  
post-harvest process to reliably achieve  
the appropriate reduction of the target  
pathogen should be validated by a study  
approved by the shellfish control authority  
with concurrence from FDA.  A study is  
performed to initially validate the efficacy  
of the process and to revalidate it when  
there has been a change in the process.    
Process verification may also be required  
at predetermined intervals. Additional  
guidance on conducting a validation study  
can be found in the “National Shellfish  
Sanitation Program Guide for the Control  
of Molluscan Shellfish 2007 Revision.”  
Validating an IQF with extended frozen  
storage process may require access to  
suitable facilities and the application of  
recognized methods.  The equipment  
should be designed, operated, and  
maintained to deliver the established  
process to every unit of the product.   
In some instances, inoculated pack  
studies may be necessary to establish the  
minimum process.  In other instances,  
existing literature or federal, state, or  
local regulations that establish minimum  
processes or adequacy of equipment  
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
341 
may be available.  Characteristics of the  
process, product, and/or equipment that  
affect the adequacy of the established  
minimum IQF with extended frozen  
storage process should be taken into  
consideration in the validation of  
the process.  A record of the process  
validation studies should be maintained;  
AND 
•	 Before a temperature-indicating device (e.g., 
a thermometer) or temperature-recording  
device (e.g., a recording thermometer) is 
put into service, check the accuracy of the 
device to verify that the factory calibration 
has not been affected.  This check can be 
accomplished by: 
°  Immersing the sensor in an ice slurry 
(32°F (0°C)) if the device will be used at 
or near refrigeration temperature; 
OR 
°  Immersing the sensor in boiling water  
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used  
at or near the boiling point (note that  
the temperature should be adjusted to  
compensate for altitude, when necessary); 
OR 
°  Doing a combination of the above if 
the device will be used at or near room 
temperature; 
OR 
°  Comparing the temperature indicated by  
the device with the reading on a known  
accurate reference device (e.g., a NIST-
traceable thermometer) under conditions  
that are similar to how it will be used  
(e.g., air temperature, product internal  
temperature) within the temperature  
range at which it will be used;  
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
indicating device or temperature-recording 
device daily before the beginning of 
operations.  In addition to checking that the 
device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and has, where applicable, 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-indicating device  
or temperature-recording device against a 
known accurate reference device (e.g., a 
NIST-traceable thermometer) at least once a 
year or more frequently if recommended by 
the device manufacturer.  Optimal calibration 
frequency is dependent upon the type, 
condition, past performance, and conditions  
of use of the device.  Consistent temperature 
variations away from the actual value (drift) 
found during checks and/or calibration may 
show a need for more frequent calibration 
or the need to replace the device (perhaps 
with a more durable device).  Devices 
used to determine the core temperature of 
frozen fish or fishery products may require 
more frequent calibration.  Calibration  
should be performed at a minimum of two 
temperatures that bracket the temperature  
range at which it is used; 
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action,  
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed.  
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
342 
 
 
 
  
  
 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
343 
TABLE 17-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - IQF WITH EXTENDED STORAGE
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - IQF With Extended Storage.”  This
example illustrates how a raw oyster processor using a continuous cryogenic freezer can control pathogen survival through processes designed to retain raw product 
characteristics. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Pathogen survival through processes designed to retain raw product characteristics may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 
3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., pathogens from the harvest area, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, natural toxins, pathogenic bacteria 
growth and toxin formation during processing, food and color additives, and metal fragments)  
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
IQF
freezer 
V. vulnificus  
survival 
The minimum or
maximum values for 
the critical factors
 established by a 
scientific validation 
study* 
Critical factors 
that affect the 
effectiveness 
of the
process, as 
specifi ed by 
the study* 
Use
equipment
appropriate
to the critical
limit* 
With 
sufficient 
frequency to
achieve control* 
IQF
equipment
operator 
Segregate and hold
the product for 
evaluation  
Adjust or repair 
equipment as needed 
IQF record Process validation
Check the data logger
for accuracy and 
damage and to ensure
that it
is operational before 
putting into operation; 
check it daily, at the 
beginning of
operations; and 
calibrate it once per 
year 
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action, and 
verification records 
within 1 week of 
preparation 
The minimum length 
of frozen storage 
established by a 
scientific validation 
study* 
Length of 
frozen 
storage 
Clock Beginning and
end of each lot 
Frozen storage 
operator 
Frozen 
storage 
record 
The
maximum temperature 
of frozen storage 
established by a 
scientific validation 
study* 
Temperature 
of
frozen 
storage 
Digital time/
temperature 
data logger 
Continuous,
with visual
check of
recorded data
once per lot 
Frozen storage 
operator 
Data
logger
printout 
* Note: This plan is for illustrative purposes only.  An actual plan should specify the actual critical limits for the IQF freezer, actual minimum frozen storage temperature, and actual minimum length 
of frozen storage. Additionally, an actual plan should specify the actual critical factors that will be monitored, the way in which they will be monitored, and the frequency of monitoring. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on  
display in the Division of Dockets Management,  
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane,  
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see  
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m.,  
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011,  
FDA had verified the Web site address for the  
references it makes available as hyperlinks from  
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not  
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011.  
•	 Food Standards Program Codex Alimentarius  
Commission. 2003. Codex general standard for  
irradiated foods  (CODEX STAN 106-1983, rev.  
1-2003). Food and Agriculture Organization and  
World Health Organization, Rome, Italy. 
•	 Food Standards Program Codex Alimentarius  
Commission. 2003. Recommended  
international code of practice for radiation 
processing of food (CAC/RCP 19-1979, rev. 
2-2003). Food and Agriculture Organization 
and World Health Organization, Rome, Italy. 
•	 Harewood, R. S. Rippey, and M. Montesalvo. 
1994. Effect of gamma irradiation on shelf 
life and bacterial and viral loads in hard-
shelled clams (Mercenaria mercenaria).  
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60: 2666-2670. 
•	 Subcommittee E10.01 on Radiation 
Processing: Dosimetry and Applications.  
2003. Standard guide for irradiation of 
finfish and aquatic invertebrates used as 
food to control pathogens and spoilage 
microorganisms. ASTM International, West 
Conshohocken, PA. 
•	 Subcommittee E10.01 on Radiation 
Processing: Dosimetry and Applications.  
2004. Standards on dosimetry for radiation 
processing. ASTM International, West 
Conshohocken, PA. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Irradiation in the production, processing 
and handling of food. In Code of Federal 
Regulations, 21 CFR 179. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Ionizing  
radiation for the treatment of food. In Code  
of Federal Regulations,  21 CFR 179.26. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2007.  
National Shellfish Sanitation Program,  
Guide for the Control of Molluscan Shellfish 
2007 Revision. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, 
Food and Drug Administration, Center 
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD.  http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
FoodSafety/Product-SpecificInformation/ 
Seafood/FederalStatePrograms/ 
NationalShellfishSanitationProgram/ 
ucm046353.htm. 
CHAPTER 17: Pathogenic Bacteria Survival Through Processes Designed to Retain Raw Product Characteristics 
344 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and 
Specialized Cooking Processes 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
The introduction of pathogenic bacteria after 
pasteurization and certain specialized cooking 
processes can cause consumer illness.  The 
primary pathogens of concern are Clostridium 
botulinum (C. botulinum), Listeria monocytogenes, 
Campylobacter jejuni, pathogenic strains of 
Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., 
Yersinia enterocolitica, Staphylococcus aureus (S. 
aureus), Vibrio cholerae, Vibrio vulnificus, and 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus. See Appendix 7 for a 
description of the public health impacts of 
these pathogens. 
•	 
Goal of pasteurization and specialized 
cooking processes 
Pasteurization is a heat treatment applied to 
eliminate the most resistant pathogenic bacteria 
of public health concern that is reasonably likely 
to be present in the food.  With fishery products, 
pasteurization is usually performed after the product 
is placed in the hermetically sealed finished product 
container.  It is applied to fishery products that are 
distributed either refrigerated or frozen.  Examples 
of pasteurized fishery products follow:  pasteurized 
crabmeat, pasteurized surimi-based analog products, 
and pasteurized lobster meat. 
In addition to eliminating pathogenic bacteria, 
the pasteurization process also greatly reduces 
the number of spoilage bacteria present in the 
fishery product.  Spoilage bacteria normally 
restrict the growth of pathogenic bacteria through 
competition.  Rapid growth of pathogenic bacteria 
that may be introduced after pasteurization is, 
therefore, a concern. This chapter covers control 
of recontamination after pasteurization. 
For some products that are marketed refrigerated, 
cooking is performed immediately before reduced 
oxygen packaging (e.g., vacuum packaging, 
modified atmosphere packaging).  For these 
products, the cooking process is targeted to 
eliminate the spores of C. botulinum type E 
and non-proteolytic types B and F, particularly 
when the product does not contain other 
barriers that are sufficient to prevent growth and 
toxin formation by this pathogen (e.g., many 
refrigerated, vacuum packaged hot-filled soups, 
chowders, and sauces). 
These specialized cooking processes, which are 
discussed in Chapter 16, have much in common 
with pasteurization processes, which are also 
discussed in Chapter 16.  For example, control 
of recontamination after the product is placed in 
the finished product container is critical to the 
safety of these products.  Additionally, because 
these products are cooked before they are 
packaged, they are at risk for recontamination 
between cooking and packaging. The risk of this 
recontamination may be minimized by filling 
directly from the cook kettle using a sanitary, 
automated, continuous-filling system (designed to 
minimize the risk of recontamination) while the 
product is still hot (i.e., hot filling).  This control 
strategy may not be suitable for products such as 
crabmeat, lobster meat, or crayfish meat that are 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
345 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
handled between cooking and filling.  Hot filling 
is covered in this chapter. 
•	 
Control of pathogenic bacteria introduction 
after pasteurization and after specialized 
cooking processes 
There are three primary causes of 
recontamination after pasteurization and after 
cooking that is performed immediately before 
reduced oxygen packaging: 
•	 Defective container closures; 
•	 Contaminated container cooling water; 
•	 Recontamination between cooking and 
reduced oxygen packaging. 
Poorly formed or defective container closures 
can increase the risk of pathogens entering the 
container through container handling that occurs 
after pasteurization or after the cooked product is 
filled into the reduced oxygen package.  This risk 
is a particular concern during container cooling 
performed in a water bath.  Contaminated 
cooling water can enter through the container 
closure, especially when the closure is defective. 
Container closure can be controlled by adherence 
to seal guidelines that are provided by the 
container or sealing machine manufacturer. 
Control is accomplished through periodic seal 
inspection. 
Contamination of cooling water can be controlled 
either by ensuring that a measurable residual 
of chlorine, or other approved water treatment 
chemical, is present in the cooling water or by 
ensuring that ultraviolet (UV) treatment systems 
for the cooling water are operating properly, 
particularly for systems in which the water is 
reused or recirculated. 
Recontamination between cooking and reduced 
oxygen packaging in continuous filling systems, 
where the product is packaged directly from 
the kettle, can be controlled by hot filling at 
temperatures at or above 185°F (85°C).  FDA 
is interested in information on the value of 
adding a time component (e.g., 3 minutes) to 
this hot filling temperature recommendation to 
provide limited lethality for any non-proteolytic  
C. botulinum spores present on the packaging  
material. 
It may also be prudent to use packaging that has  
been manufactured or treated to inactivate spores  
of  C. botulinum type E and non-proteolytic  
types B and F (e.g., gamma irradiation and hot  
extrusion).  FDA is also interested in comment on  
the utility of such measures. 
•	 
Strategies for controlling pathogenic 
bacteria growth 
There are a number of strategies for the control 
of pathogenic bacteria in fish and fishery 
products.  They include: 
•	 Controlling the introduction of pathogenic 
bacteria after the pasteurization process 
and after the cooking process performed 
immediately before reduced oxygen 
packaging (covered in this chapter); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by drying 
(covered in Chapter 14); 
•	 Controlling the amount of moisture that is 
available for pathogenic bacteria growth 
(water activity) in the product by formulation 
(covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the amount of salt or 
preservatives, such as sodium nitrite, in the 
product (covered in Chapter 13); 
•	 Controlling the level of acidity (pH) in the 
product (covered by the Acidified Foods 
regulation, 21 CFR 114, for shelf-stable 
acidified products, and by Chapter 13 for 
refrigerated acidified products); 
•	 Controlling the source of molluscan shellfish 
and the time from exposure to air (e.g., by 
harvest or receding tide)  to refrigeration 
to control pathogens from the harvest area 
(covered in Chapter 4); 
•	 Killing pathogenic bacteria by cooking 
or pasteurization (covered in Chapter 16) 
or by retorting (covered by the Thermally 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in 
Hermetically Sealed Containers regulation, 21 
CFR 113, called the Low Acid Canned Foods 
regulation in this guidance document); 
•	 
•	 
Killing pathogens by processes that retain 
the raw product characteristics (covered in 
Chapter 17); 
Managing the amount of time that food is 
exposed to t
emperatures that are favorable 
for pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin 
production (covered generally in Chapter 12; 
for  C. botulinum, in Chapter 13; and for S.  
aureus in hydrated batter mixes, in Chapter 15). 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in  
determining whether introduction of pathogenic  
bacteria after pasteurization is a significant  
hazard at a processing step: 
1.	  Is it reasonably likely that pathogenic bacteria 
will be introduced at this processing step 
(consider post-pasteurization and post-cooking 
processing steps only)? 
It is reasonable to assume that in the absence  
of controls, pathogens of various types may  
enter the finished product container after  
pasteurization or after filling the cooked  
product into the reduced oxygen package.   
This is a particular concern for products that  
are cooled in a water bath. 
2.	  Can the introduction of pathogenic bacteria after 
pasteurization be eliminated or reduced to an 
acceptable level here? 
Introduction of pathogenic bacteria after  
pasteurization should also be considered  
a significant hazard at any processing step  
where a preventive measure is, or can be,  
used to eliminate the hazard (or reduce the  
likelihood of its occurrence to an acceptable  
level) if it is reasonably likely to occur.   
Preventive measures for introduction of  
pathogenic bacteria after pasteurization can 
include: 
•	 Controlling container sealing; 
•	 Controlling the residual of chlorine, 
or other approved water treatment 
chemical, in container cooling water; 
•	 Controlling UV light intensity of bulbs 
used for treating container cooling water 
and the flow rate of the cooling water 
mo
ving through the UV treatment system; 
•	 Hot filling the product into the final 
container in a continuous filling system. 
•	 Intended use 
It is unlikely that the intended use will affect the 
significance of this hazard. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for introduction of 
pathogenic bacteria after pasteurization. 
If you identified the hazard as significant, you 
should identify the container sealing step, the 
water bath container cooling step, and the hot 
filling step (where applicable) as the CCPs for this 
hazard. 
Example: 
A crabmeat processor that pasteurizes the 
finished product cans after filling and cools 
them in a water bath should set the CCPs for 
introduction of pathogenic bacteria after 
pasteurization at the can seaming and water 
bath can cooling steps. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control Strategy 
Example - Control of Recontamination.” 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides a strategy to 
control the introduction of pathogenic bacteria 
into the product after pasteurization.  You may 
select a control strategy that is different from that 
which is suggested, provided it complies with the 
requirements of the applicable food safety laws 
and regulations. 
The following is an example of a control strategy 
included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPLY TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
Control of recontamination  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - CONTROL OF 
RECONTAMINATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
For container sealing: 
•	 Contain
er or sealing machine manufacturer’s 
seal guidelines. 
For container cooling: 
•	 Measurabl
e residual of chlorine, or other 
approved water treatment chemical, at the 
discharge point of the container cooling 
tank; 
OR 
•	 Equipme
nt manufacturer’s UV light intensity 
and flow rate guidelines. 
For hot filling: 
•	 Product t
emperature of 185°F (85°C) or 
higher as the product enters the final 
container. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
For container sealing: 
•	 Container
 integrity. 
For container cooling: 
•	 For chemi
cal treatment: 
Residual chlorine, or other approved 
water treatment chemical, in the cooling 
water; 
° 
OR 
•	 For UV treat
ment: 
Intensity of UV light;° 
AND
 
Cooling water flow rate.
 ° 
For hot filling: 
•	 Product t
emperature as the product enters 
the final container. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
For container sealing: 
Visual examination of containers (non­
destructive): 
•	 Recomme
ndations for visual examinations 
that ensure a reliable hermetic seal should 
be obtained from the container or sealing 
machine manufacturer.  They should include: 
For double-seamed metal and plastic 
cans: 
° 
•	 The external features of the double 
seam should be examined for 
gross closure def
ects, including:  
cutovers, seam sharpness, false 
seams, deadheading, droop, damage 
to the countersink wall indicating 
a broken chuck, cable cuts, and 
product overlapping the flange. 
In addition, visual examination 
should include examination of 
the entire container for product 
leakage or other obvious defects; 
OR
 
For pouches: 
° 
•	 Visual examination should be 
sufficient to detect gross closure 
defects, including:  cuts,
 fractures, 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
348 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
non-bonding, malformation, 
puncture, abrasion, blister, 
contaminated seal, delamination, seal 
creep, wrinkle, flex cracks, crushed 
package, or other obvious defects; 
OR
 
For glass containers:
 
° 
•	 Visual examination should be 
sufficient to detect gross closure 
and glass defects, including:  cap 
tilt,
 cocked cap, crushed lug, 
stripped cap, cut through, and 
chipped and cracked glass finish; 
AND 
Detailed examination of containers (destructive): 
•	 Recomme
ndations for seal evaluation 
measurements that ensure a reliable hermetic 
seal should be obtained from the container 
or sealing machine manufacturer.  They 
should include: 
For double-seamed metal and plastic 
cans: 
° 
•	 The examination should include a 
teardown examination of the can. 
If the micrometer method is used, 
three measurements, approximately 
120° apart around the double seam, 
should be made.
 Measurements 
should include: cover hook, 
body hook, width, tightness, and 
thickness.  If the optical method 
(seamscope or projector) is used, 
cuts should be made at at least two 
different locations, excluding the 
side seam juncture.  Measurements 
should include body hook, 
overlap, tightness, and thickness; 
OR
 
For pouches: 
° 
•	 The examination should include 
burst, vacuum or bubble testing.  It 
may also include:  drop testing, peel 
testing (tensile streng
th), residual 
gas testing, electroconductivity 
testing, and dye testing; 
OR
 
For glass containers: 
° 
•	 The examination should include cold 
water vacuum testing.  Additional 
examinations ma
y include:  for 
lug-type caps, security values (lug­
tension) and for lug-type, twist 
caps, pull-up (lug position). 
For container cooling: 
•	 For chemi
cal treatment: 
Measure residual of chlorine, or other 
approved water treatment chemical,  
at the discharge point of the container 
cooling tank; 
° 
OR 
•	 For UV treat
ment: 
Use a UV light meter;° 
AND
 
Use a flow rate meter.
 ° 
For hot filling: 
•	 Use a conti
nuous temperature-measuring 
instrument (e.g., a recorder thermometer). 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
For container sealing:
 
Visual examination of containers:
 
•	 At least one c
ontainer from each sealing 
head at least every 30 minutes of sealing 
machine operation.  At a minimum, visual 
examinations should include those made 
at the beginning of the production day, 
and immediately after a jam in the sealing 
machine, or after machine adjustment, repair, 
or prolonged shutdown; 
AND 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
349 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed examination of containers: 
•	 At least one container from each sealing 
head at least every 4 hours of sealing 
machine operation.  At a minimum, visual 
examinations should include those made 
at the beginning of the production day, 
and immediately after a jam in the sealing 
machine, or after machine adjustment, repair, 
or prolonged shutdown. 
For conta
iner cooling: 
•	 For chemi
cal treatment: 
At least once every 4 hours of use; ° 
OR 
•	 For UV treat
ment: 
At least daily. ° 
For hot filling: 
•	 Continu
ous monitoring, with a visual check 
of the instrument at least once per batch of 
cooked product. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
For container sealing: 
•	 Monitor
ing may be performed by any person 
who is trained and qualified to conduct 
container examinations. 
For container cooling: 
•	 Monitor
ing may be performed by any person 
who has an understanding of the nature of 
the controls. 
For hot filling: 
•	 For continuous temperature-measuring 
instruments:
  
Monitoring is performed by the 
equipment itself.   The visual check of 
the data generated by the equipment,  
to ensure that the critical limits have 
consistently been met, may be performed 
by any person who has an understanding 
of the nature of the controls.  
° 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
For container sealing: 
•	 Repack an
d recook or repasteurize the 
affected product; 
OR 
•	 Segrega
te and hold the product to evaluate 
the seriousness of the defects, which may 
include, but is not limited to, 100% visual 
inspection of all affected containers to 
remove the defective containers.  Any 
containers that are found to be unsafe should 
be destroyed, diverted to a non-food use, or 
repacked and recooked; 
OR 
•	 Divert th
e product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert to a 
canning operation); 
OR 
•	 Destroy t
he product; 
OR 
•	 Divert th
e product to a non-food use. 
For hot filling: 
•	 Recook th
e product; 
OR 
•	 Segrega
te and hold the product for a safety 
evaluation.  If the product is found to be 
unsafe, it should be destroyed, diverted to a 
non-food use, or recooked; 
OR 
•	 Divert th
e product to a use in which the 
critical limit is not applicable (e.g., divert to a 
canning operation); 
OR 
•	 Destroy t
he product; 
OR 
•	 Divert th
e product to a non-food use. 
AND 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
350 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Take one or more of the following corrective actions to 
regain control over the operation after a critical limit 
deviation: 
For container sealing: 
•	 Identif
y and correct the source of the defect. 
For container cooling: 
•	 If no measura
ble residual chlorine, or other 
approved water treatment chemical, is 
detected, add chlorine or adjust the chlorine-
metering system and recheck for chlorine 
residual; 
OR 
•	 If UV inten
sity is inadequate, replace or 
clean the bulbs or shields; 
OR 
•	 If flow exce
eds the critical limit, adjust or 
replace the pump. 
For hot filling: 
•	 Adjust th
e cooking equipment to increase the 
processing temperature; 
OR 
•	 Adjust th
e post-cook process to minimize 
time delays. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
For container sealing: 
•	 Record of v
isual examination of containers; 
AND 
•	 Record of d
etailed examination of containers. 
For container cooling: 
•	 For chemi
cal treatment: 
Record of residual chlorine, or other 
approved water treatment chemical; 
° 
OR 
•	 For UV treat
ment: 
Record of UV intensity testing; ° 
AND 
Record of flow rate testing. ° 
For hot filling: 
•	 Record of c
ontinuous temperature 
monitoring; 
AND 
•	 Record of v
isual checks of recorded data.  
Establish Verification Procedures. 
For container sealing: 
•	 Obtain co
ntainer seal guidelines from 
container or sealing machine manufacturer; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
For container cooling: 
•	 Obtain UV l
ight intensity and flow rate 
guidelines from the UV light manufacturer; 
AND 
•	 Review mo
nitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
For hot filling: 
•	 Before a t
emperature-recording device (e.g., 
a recording thermometer) is put into service, 
check the accuracy of the device to verify that 
the factory calibration has not been affected. 
This check can be accomplished by: 
Immersing the sensor in boiling water  
(212°F (100°C)) if the device will be used  
at or near the boiling point (note that  
the temperature should be adjusted to  
compensate for altitude, when necessary); 
° 
OR 
Comparing the temperature reading 
on the device with the reading on a 
known accurate reference device (e.g.,  
a ther
mometer traceable to National 
° 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
351 
 
 Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) standards) under conditions that 
are similar to how it will be used (e.g., 
product internal temperature) within the 
temperature range at which it will be 
used; 
•	 Review mo
nitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
AND 
•	 Once in service, check the temperature-
recording device daily before the beginning 
of operations.  Less frequent accuracy checks 
may be appropriate if they are recommended 
by the instrument manufacturer and the 
history of use of the instrument in your 
facility has shown that the instrument 
consistently remains accurate for a longer 
period of time.  In addition to checking that 
the device is accurate by one of the methods 
described above, this process should include 
a visual examination of the sensor and any 
attached wires for damage or kinks.  The 
device should be checked to ensure that it 
is operational and, where applicable, has 
sufficient ink and paper; 
AND 
•	 Calibrate the temperature-recording  
device against a known accurate reference 
device (e.g., NIST-traceable thermometer) 
at least once a year or more frequently if 
recommended by the device manufacturer.  
Optimal calibration frequency is dependent  
upon the type, condition, past performance, 
and conditions of use of the device.  
Consistent temperature variations away  
from the actual value (drift) found during 
checks and/or calibration may show a need 
for more frequent calibration or the need 
to replace the device (perhaps with a more 
durable device).  Devices subjected to high 
temperatures for extended periods of time 
may require more frequent calibration.  
Calibration should be performed at a 
minimum of two temperatures that bracket 
the temperature range at which it is used; 
AND 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
352 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
353 
TABLE 18-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE - CONTROL OF RECONTAMINATION 
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point plan using “Control Strategy Example - Control of Recontamination.”  This example illustrates
how a processor of pasteurized blue crabmeat, packed in steel cans, can control introduction of pathogenic bacteria after pasteurization. It is provided for illustrative
purposes only. 
Pathogenic bacteria recontamination after pasteurization may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other 
potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, pathogenic bacteria growth and toxin formation during processing, pathogenic bacteria 
survival through cooking and pasteurization, and metal fragments).   
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE* 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Container
sealing 
Pathogenic 
bacteria 
introduction 
No visible cutovers, seam 
sharpness, false seams,
deadheading, droop,
damage to the countersink
wall indicating a broken 
chuck, cable cuts, product 
overlapping the flange,
product leakage, or other 
obvious defects 
Container
integrity 
Visual seam 
examination 
One can per
seaming head
every 30 
minutes; at startup; 
and after jams,
adjustments,
repairs, and 
prolonged
shutdowns 
Seamer
operator 
Identify and correct 
the source of the
defect 
Evaluate the 
seriousness of the
defect, and hold for 
further evaluation if 
necessary 
Visual seam 
examination 
record 
Obtain
can seam
guidelines
from the can
manufacturer
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation Cover hook: .070 inch 
minimum;
body hook: .072-.088 inch;
width: .125 inch maximum;
thickness .052-.058 inch;
tightness 80% 
Container
integrity 
Double seam
teardown 
examination,
using a
micrometer at
3 points on
the seam, 120° 
apart 
One can per
seaming head
every 4 hours; at 
startup; and 
after jams,
adjustments,
repairs, and 
prolonged
shutdowns 
Seamer
operator 
Identify and correct 
the source of the
defect 
Evaluate the 
seriousness of the
defect, and 
hold for further 
evaluation if 
necessary 
Double
seam
teardown 
record 
Water 
bath
container
cooling 
Pathogenic 
bacteria 
introduction 
Measurable 
residual chlorine 
Residual 
chlorine
in water 
bath 
Rapid test Every batch Pasteurizer 
operator 
Add chlorine and 
recheck for residual 
Residual 
chlorine
record 
* Note: The critical limits in this example are for illustrative purposes only and are not related to any recommended process 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Gavin, A., and L. M. Weddig (ed.). 1995. 
Canned foods – principles of thermal 
process control, acidification, and container 
closure evaluation. National Food Processors 
Institute, Washington, DC. 
CHAPTER 18: Introduction of Pathogenic Bacteria After Pasteurization and Specialized Cooking Processes 
354 
CHAPTER 19 : UNDECLARED MAJOR FOOD ALLERGENS AND FOOD 
INTOLERANCE SUBSTANCES  
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD
• Food Allergens
Food allergies are a significant public health 
concern. Allergic reactions vary in severity from 
gastrointestinal disturbances and skin irritation, 
to anaphylaxis, shock and death. Consumers with 
allergies must avoid food containing allergenic 
materials to avoid these reactions. Because of 
this, consumers rely on food labels to disclose 
the presence of allergenic ingredients. Successful 
avoidance requires that food manufacturers de-
velop, implement, and maintain the necessary 
controls to ensure allergens that are intended to be 
present in a food are declared on the label and that 
the presence of unintended allergens is prevented. 
Advisory statements such as “may contain [al-
lergen]” or “manufactured on equipment that also 
processes [allergen]” cannot be used as a substitute 
for current good manufacturing practices (cGMPs) 
intended to prevent allergen cross-contact. 
Control of allergens will be accomplished through 
both the implementation of prerequisite programs 
and through HACCP plan controls that ensure 
accurate product labeling. Product labeling, 
label control, and allergen cross-contact controls 
are important components of a processor’s 
HACCP program. Product development, product 
formulation, receipt of pre-printed labels, printing 
of in-house labels, and storage of allergenic in-
gredients are examples of things to consider during 
the development of an allergen control strategy.  
Domestic and imported food product labels, 
packaging materials and other finished product 
containers must accurately reflect U.S. regulations 
regarding the declaration of major food allergens 
ingredients.
No minimum threshold has been established for 
allergenic ingredients, for either intentionally or 
unintentionally added allergens. However, there are 
emerging data on levels of major food allergens that 
may be tolerated by a large majority of individuals 
in the allergic population and that can be used in 
manufacturer’s risk assessment of allergen cross-
contact hazards. 
• Labeling:
The Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection 
Act of 2004 (FALCPA) has identified a “Major food 
allergen” (allergen) as one of the following eight 
foods or food groups:
•
Crustacean shellfish (e.g., crab, lobster, or
shrimp);
• Eggs;
• Fish (e.g., finfish);
• Milk;
• Peanuts;
• Soybeans;
• Tree nuts (e.g., almonds, pecans, or
walnuts); and
• Wheat.
Foods that contain a major food allergen as an 
ingredient, must (with a few exceptions such as 
highly refined soybean oil) declare the presence 
of that allergen in plain English terms using the 
common or usual name of the major food allergen 
either as part of the ingredient declaration or in a 
“contains” statement that is located immediately 
after or adjacent to the ingredient declaration 
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
19 - 1 (August 2019)
on labels. A “contains” statement differs from a 
“may contain” statement in that the “contains” 
statement identifies allergenic ingredients added 
to the commodity based on product formulation; 
whereby, the “may contain” statement describes 
the potential presence of an allergenic ingredient 
which is not part of the product formulation. 
The definition of “fish” differs between the Food 
Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 
2004 (FALCPA) and 21 CFR Part 123 Fish and Fishery 
Products. For more information regarding FALCPA and 
the Seafood regulation go their respective websites: 
https://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/
GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/
Allergens/ucm106187.htm  and https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/
CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=123 . “Fish”, within 
the context of FALCPA and the identification of 
allergenic ingredients, refers to finfish such as 
flounder, tilapia, grouper, and other vertebrate 
fish with fins. This differs from the definition in 
21 CFR Part 123 which includes all aquatic animal 
life intended for human consumption, excluding 
mammals and birds. Allergen label declarations 
must be in compliance with FALCPA as well as other 
labeling requirements. 
FDA considers the “common or usual name” 
synonymous with the “market” name for the sea-
food industry. Therefore, the “market” name of 
fish species and crustacean shellfish should be 
used to identify the food source for these two 
major food allergen groups.  The “market” names 
can be found on “ The Seafood List ”. For more 
information regarding the seafood list, go to its 
website: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/
fdcc/?set=seafoodlist. In addition, the term “fish” 
may be added to the market name on the label if 
the market name is not otherwise recognized as a 
fish by the consumer for example, gar fish. 
Refer to the following websites for more information 
regarding allergen labeling requirements: 
•	 https://www.fda.gov/food/ingredi -
entspackaginglabeling/foodallergens/de -
fault.htm and 
•	 https://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceReg -
ulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryIn-
formation/Allergens/default.htm. 
Raw agricultural commodities (whole raw fish or 
crustaceans in their natural state), fish other than 
finfish and crustacean shellfish (i.e., molluscan 
shellfish), and highly refined oils are exempt from 
allergen labeling requirements; however, they are 
still subject to other FDA labeling requirements.  
•	 Allergen Cross-Contact:
Processors are required to implement cGMP controls 
that prevent allergen cross-contact. Allergen cross-
contact is defined as the unintentional incorporation 
of a food allergen into a food. Allergen cross-
contact can occur either between foods that 
contain different food allergens or between foods 
with and without food allergens. There can be 
multiple opportunities for cross-contact within a 
processing facility such as incoming ingredients 
with unintentional allergens, during processing 
or storage of ingredients, through inadequate 
cleaning of equipment and/or utensils [e.g. spoons, 
spatulas, scoops, employee apparel (aprons and 
gloves)], lack of process scheduling, and through 
poor facility design (e.g. air flow movement and 
filtration). Controls are normally implemented 
and monitored as part of the cGMP, prerequisite 
program, and/or sanitation monitoring procedures 
to prevent cross-contact in these areas.
For facilities that manufacture or process multiple 
food allergens, FDA recommends the facility 
take measures to prevent allergen cross-contact 
and subsequently the hazard of undeclared food 
allergens with product that do not contain or 
contain different allergens. Allergen cross-contact 
controls are needed when ingredients, in-process 
materials, and finished products are received, 
handled, transported, and stored. 
At this time FDA does not require cross-contact 
controls between specific finfish species; however, 
we do require cross-contact controls between 
crustacean species and finfish species. 
Allergen cross-contact controls are intended to 
provide separation in time and space between the 
products with different allergenic ingredients. The 
appropriate allergen control measures are facility 
and product dependent. Factors to consider include 
the properties of the allergenic ingredients being 
used, the manufacturing process, facility structure 
and design, and the finished product. Areas where 
controls may be implemented include: 
•	 Review/assessment of incoming or supplier 
ingredients for allergen cross-contact risk;
•	 Equipment and process design (look at 
traffic patterns, air flow, equipment design 
19 - 2 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
to prevent accumulation of food residue, 
provide shields/catch pans/partitions for 
equipment); 
•	 Dedication of processing systems (ded-
icated processing and packaging lines 
and equipment, dedicated utensils and 
employees’ apparel, color code system for 
allergens, dedicate and/or restrict move-
ment of employees); 
•	
Product containments and equipment 
barriers (physically separating the system 
through the use of walls/closed off rooms); 
•	 Production scheduling (separate by time of 
manufacture through sequencing whereby 
the food with the fewest allergen or no 
allergen is produced first and the food 
with the most allergens is produced last in 
combination with effective allergen clean-
ing and sanitation procedures between 
changeover of production);
•	 Management of the movement of materials 
and personnel (movement of ingredients, 
equipment, employees, utensils, tools, 
employees apparel, work-in-progress 
(WIP), rework, finished products and 
waste materials during operation needs to 
be managed to minimize allergen cross-
contact); and
•	 Rework of finished or partially finished 
products that are reincorporated into the 
manufacturing process and WIP of partially 
finished products moving between different 
productions states/steps. Rework can 
increase the risk of introducing allergens, 
either by erroneous addition of allergen-
containing rework/WIP into a product that 
does not contain the specific allergen(s) as 
ingredients, or by cross-contact of allergen-
containing materials with non-allergen-
containing materials during holding or 
storage.
•	 Control of oil in fryers. Using dedicated 
fryers would minimize the risk of allergen 
cross-contact. 
Measures should be taken to control allergen cross-
contact within the facility; however, the measures 
do not necessarily have to be incorporated into 
the HACCP plan itself. The measures can be 
incorporated into the firm’s prerequisite programs 
or other programs as appropriate. 
FDA has been conducting research to determine 
whether allergenic proteins (shrimp protein) can 
be transferred through fryer oils. The following 
conclusions were identified as a result of our first 
series of tests: 
•	
Shrimp protein was observed being 
transferred into the fryer oil through the 
frying process. 
•	 Shrimp protein was transferred to French 
fries when fried in the same oil used to 
fry the shrimp; however, limitations were 
observed to only the first batch of oils and 
fries tested. 
Refer to Appendix 10 of this Guide for further 
assistance with identification of potential cross-
contact areas and establishing controls for allergen 
cross-contact. 
•	 Allergen Sanitation Control Procedures: 
Cleaning and sanitation controls are crucial for 
the prevention of allergen cross-contact within a 
facility. Establishing written SSOPs or prerequisite 
programs help to define the controls and ensure 
cleaning sufficient to prevent cross-contact. Many 
manufacturing facilities have already established 
and implemented effective cleaning and sanitation 
controls for microbial cross contamination; however, 
procedures targeting microbial hazards may not 
be adequate for allergen removal. Therefore, it is 
important to evaluate the sanitation controls to 
ensure they adequately remove allergen residues 
from all surfaces. 
FDA has identified considerations for establishing 
and implemented effective cleaning and sanitation 
controls for allergen removal. Refer to Appendix 9 
of this Guide for further assistance with establishing 
allergen sanitation controls or to assist with 
verifying and validation of the current controls 
to ensure they are adequate to prevent allergen 
cross-contact.
•	 Food Intolerance Substances 
Certain food and color additives can cause hyper-
sensitivity reactions, or food intolerances, in some 
consumers. Symptoms may be similar to those 
caused by food allergens and can include a tingling 
sensation in the mouth, swelling of the tongue and 
19 - 3 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
throat, difficulty in breathing (e.g. asthma), hives, 
vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. Food 
intolerance substances including sulfiting agents 
and FD&C Yellow No. 5 (Yellow No. 5) are commonly 
used in fish and fishery products. People sensitive 
to sulfiting agents can experience symptoms that 
range from mild to life-threatening reactions.  
People sensitive to Yellow No. 5 can experience 
symptoms that can range from mild to moderate 
severity.
Common uses of Yellow No. 5 include its addition 
to certain species of smoked fish, such as sable, 
to impart color. When Yellow No. 5 is used, it must 
be declared on the label as an ingredient per 21 
CFR 74.705. No minimum threshold has been 
established.
Sulfiting agents are commonly used as a pre-
servative to prevent melanosis or “black spot” on 
shrimp and spiny lobster shells. In addition, they 
can be used to retain the red color of the octopus’ 
skin in cooked octopus’ processes, to prevent 
darkening of conch meat, and may be included 
as an ingredient in breading. FDA requires that 
processors declare the presence of sulfites when 
the concentration meets or exceeds 10 ppm. The 
usage and/or concentration of the sulfiting agent 
found in the food will determine whether it will 
be declared on the label as an ingredient (to be 
discussed later in the chapter.) 
Currently, there are six sulfiting agents allowed 
in processed food. They should be listed on food 
labels as follows per 21 CFR 101.100(a)(4): 
•	 potassium bisulfite;
•	 potassium metabisulfite;
•	 sodium bisulfite; 
•	 sodium metabisulfite;
•	 sodium sulfite; and
•	 sulfur dioxide.
Advisory statements such as “may contain sulfites” 
cannot be used as a substitute for accurate labeling 
in the ingredient panel through the implementation 
of HACCP plan controls. 
Table 19-1, “When to Declare Sulfiting Agents on 
Finished Product Label,” provides several examples 
of raw materials treated with sulfiting agents 
and the rationale for deciding whether or not 
the finished product requires a sulfiting agent 
declaration.
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
19 - 4 (August 2019)
TABLE 19-1
Declaring Sulfiting Agents on Finished Product Label.
Examples of Sulfiting Agent Use. Examples of Finished Food. Label Finished 
Food when levels 
are ˂ 10 ppm.
Label Finished 
Food when Levels 
are ≥ 10 ppm.
•	 Raw, shell-on shrimp or lobster treated with sulfiting agents 
to prevent black spot.
•	 Sulfiting agents added to cooked octopus as an antioxidant to 
retain the red skin color of the octopus.
•	 Sulfiting agents added to conch meat to prevent 
discoloration
.
•	 Raw or cooked shell-on shrimp or lobster.
•	 Cooked octopus.
•	 Conch meat.
YES. 
1. 
(Labels 
required.) 
YES. 
1. 
(Labels 
required.)
•	 Raw, shell-on shrimp or lobster treated with sulfiting agents 
to prevent black spot.
•	 Raw, shell-on shrimp or lobster treated with sulfiting agents 
to prevent black spot.
•	 Raw or cooked, peeled shrimp or lobster meat.
•	 Food containing raw or cooked, peeled shrimp 
or lobster meat as an ingredient (e.g., seafood 
casserole).
NO
. 
2. 
(Labels not 
required). 
YES
. 
2. 
(Labels 
required).
FOOTNOTE:
1. The sulfiting agents have an ongoing technical or functional effect on/in the finished food and must be declared regardless of the level in the finished food.
2. The sulfiting agents have no technical or functional effect in the finished food and do not have to be declared unless the level in the finished food is either ≥ 10 ppm or 
the sulfiting agents were added to the finished food at any level. In addition, when a sulfiting agent or a combination of sulfiting agents is added to finished food such that 
their collective concentration in/on the finished food is ≥ 10 ppm, then each must be declared by its approved label name (listed above).
Example:
A processor receives frozen, raw, headless, shell-on shrimp that are labeled with a sulfiting agent declaration. The shrimp had been treated with sulfiting agents to prevent the formation of black 
spot during on-board handling. The processor thaws, peels, and deveins the shrimp, and then adds it to a gumbo in which the processor has determined that the final sulfiting agent concentration 
is less than 10 ppm. Because the sulfiting agent no longer has a functional effect in the finished food, and because the concentration of the sulfiting agent is less than 10 ppm in the finished product, 
the processor is not required to have a sulfiting agent declaration on the label of the shrimp gumbo.
Example:
A processor receives frozen, raw, headless, shell-on shrimp that are labeled with a sulfiting agent declaration. The processor uses the shrimp to prepare a shell-on, deveined, easy-peel shrimp, which 
is packaged and refrozen. Because the sulfiting agent continues to have an ongoing technical effect in the finished product, the processor is required to have a sulfiting agent declaration on the 
finished product label, regardless of the concentration of sulfiting agent in the finished product.
19 - 5 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT
The following guidance will assist in determining 
whether undeclared food allergens and food 
intolerance substances (e.g., sulfiting agents 
or Yellow No. 5) are a significant hazard at a 
processing step:
1. Is it reasonably likely that a major food allergen, 
and/or food intolerance substance, will be 
introduced at this processing step (e.g., does it 
come in with the raw material or will the process 
introduce it)?
Under ordinary circumstances, consider whether 
food allergens and food intolerance substances 
are a significant hazard at the:  
•	 Receiving step: 
o When the raw ingredients contain 
or are reasonably likely to contain 
major food allergens and/or food 
intolerance substances, for example, a 
historic occurrence of food intolerance 
substances in that ingredient or 
containing an allergenic sub-ingredient.
•	 Product formulation step:
o When a raw material is, or contains one 
or more of the major food allergens 
(including non-fishery allergens), or a 
food intolerance substance is used as 
an ingredient in the formulation of any 
of the products; AND/OR
o When sulfiting agent(s) are used or 
declared in products containing shrimp, 
lobster or conch meat. A study that tests 
the range of concentration of sulfiting 
agents in the raw material and possible 
variation in formulation should be 
conducted to establish whether sulfiting 
agents will not be present at 10 ppm or 
greater in the finished product; 
2. Can the hazard of undeclared major food 
allergens, and food intolerance substances 
that were introduced at an earlier step be 
eliminated or reduced to an acceptable level 
at this processing step?
Allergens and food intolerance substances may 
be introduced during processing (e.g., through 
product formulation). The hazard occurs when 
the end products are not accurately labeled 
to declare their presence. The controls are 
either to ensure an allergen or food intolerance 
substance is not present or to ensure that its 
presence is accurately declared on the finished 
product label. Measures to prevent undeclared 
major food allergens and food intolerance 
substances include:
•	 Review of raw material labels (e.g., 
ingredient panel and/or “contains” 
statement) or accompanying documents 
in the case of unlabeled products for 
allergen and/or food intolerance substance 
declaration; 
•	 Review of finished product labels to ensure 
that the presence of allergens and/or food 
intolerance substances are declared. For 
example, compare product specifications, 
raw material labels, and end-product labels 
for allergen or food intolerance substance 
declarations;
•	
Review of a supplier’s certification or 
accompanying documentation (i.e., 
certificate of analysis) for lack of sulfiting 
agent use; 
•	
Test incoming shrimp, lobster or conch meat 
for residues of sulfiting agents;
•	 Review of the label at the point of application 
to the finished product to ensure that the 
appropriate label is placed on the product.
•	 Intended use
In the case of undeclared major food allergens and 
food intolerance substances the hazard will have 
no impact on the intended use of the product.
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS
Receiving and finished product labeling steps are 
likely CCPs.  A receiving critical control point can be 
used to monitor the content of pre-printed labels 
and to identify raw materials containing allergenic 
or food intolerance ingredients. Monitoring the list 
of ingredients and “contains” statement declarations 
also applies to labels generated in-house. The 
finished product labeling step may be used to 
monitor the accuracy of the finished product labels 
19 - 6 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
affixed to the packaging.  Some operations may 
only require a single CCP while others may require 
both critical control points.  
The following guidance will assist you in determining 
whether the receiving or product labeling step is 
a critical control point (CCP) for undeclared major 
food allergens and food intolerance substances:
1. In the case of products that are known to contain 
allergenic or food intolerance ingredients, how 
will you ensure the finished product labels 
accurately declare the presence of the hazard?
a. If the finished product is known to contain 
an allergenic ingredient or a food intolerance 
substance you should identify the product 
labeling step as a CCP.
Example:  
A smoked sablefish processor treats the 
fish with Yellow No. 5 before smoking.  The 
sablefish is an allergen and Yellow No. 5 is 
a food intolerance substance.  The finished 
product labeling step should be identified 
as the CCP to ensure: 
i. The labels declare sablefish and 
Yellow #5 in the ingredient panel; 
AND 
ii. The correct label is applied to the 
finished product.  
The control approach is referred to in this 
chapter as: Control Strategy Example 1 – 
Finished Product Label Examinations.
b. If you receive pre-printed labels and process 
products that contain identical allergenic or 
food intolerance substance ingredients, you 
may identify receipt of preprinted labels 
step as the CCP.
Example:
A breaded fish processor makes breaded 
fish fillets and breaded fish fingers using 
breading and batter that contains the 
allergens of wheat, eggs, soy, and pollock.  
The processor may identify receiving of the 
preprinted packaging materials as their 
CCP and monitor the packaging ingredients 
statements for declaration to control the 
hazards of undeclared allergens (pollock, 
wheat, eggs, soy).  
The control approach is referred to in this 
chapter as: Control Strategy Example 2 – 
Receiving Controls for Pre-printed Labels
2. In the case of shrimp, lobster, or conch meat for 
which sulfiting agents have been identified as 
a significant hazard, how will you prevent the 
presence of sulfiting agents? 
The receiving step of raw material for the 
shrimp, lobster, or conch meat should be 
identified as a CCP when the finished product 
label does not declare the presence of sulfiting 
agents. The incoming lots of raw materials 
should be assessed for the presence of sulfiting 
agents.  Preventive measures that can be 
applied here include:
a. Testing incoming shrimp, lobster, or conch 
meat for residues of sulfiting agents at or 
above 10 ppm.
Example:
A frozen shrimp processor receives shrimp 
directly from the harvest vessel and does 
not label the finished product with a sulfiting 
agent declaration.  The processor should 
set the CCP for sulfiting agents at the raw 
material receiving step and test incoming 
lots of shrimp for the presence of sulfiting 
agents.  The processor would not need 
to have a CCP for this hazard at finished 
product labeling. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as: Control 
Strategy Example 3 - Raw Material Testing.
b. Receiving a supplier’s certification identifying 
whether or not sulfiting agents were used 
on incoming lots of shrimp, lobster, or conch 
meat (with appropriate verification).
Example:
A frozen shrimp processor receives shrimp 
directly from the harvest vessel and does 
not label the finished product with a 
sulfiting agent declaration.  The processor 
should set the CCP for sulfiting agents 
19 - 7 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
at the raw material receiving step and 
obtain certificates from the harvest vessels 
that sulfiting agents were not used on the 
shrimp.  The processor would not need 
to have a CCP for this hazard at finished 
product labeling since sulfiting agents are 
not utilized.
This approach is the control strategy referred 
to as: Control Strategy Example 4 - Review 
of Supplier Declarations or Labeling.
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY
The following guidance provides four (4) control 
strategies to prevent undeclared major food 
allergens, certain food intolerance causing 
substances, and prohibited food and color additives.  
You may select a control strategy that is different 
from those that are suggested, provided it complies 
with the requirements of the applicable food safety 
laws and regulations.
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter:
Control Strategy May apply 
to primary 
processor
May apply 
to secondary 
processor
Finished 
product label 
examinations
Receiving 
controls for pre-
printed labels
Raw material 
testing
Review of 
supplier 
declarations or 
labeling
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 – FINISHED 
PRODUCT LABEL EXAMINATIONS
NOTE: Assuring the accuracy of finished product 
labels may be accomplished through: a 
single CCP whereby monitoring both the 
ingredient declaration and application 
of the label to the appropriate product 
are conducted in one CCP, usually at the 
labeling step; OR two separate CCPs 
whereby the label ingredient declarations 
are monitored at another processing step 
such as receiving (e.g., Control Strategy 
Example 2) and the label application 
to the finished product is monitored at 
the labeling step. This is an example of 
implementing a single CCP at the finished 
product labeling step. 
All label declarations must meet FALPCA require-
ments.
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All allergen and food intolerance substance 
ingredients are declared on the labels.
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 The ingredients listing on finished product 
labels.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Visual comparison of the label against the 
product specification for accuracy;
OR
•	
Visual comparison of the label against a 
list of allergenic ingredients and/or food 
intolerance substances incorporated in the 
finished product.
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 At the start of the production lot;
AND
•	 At least every 2 hours.
OR
•	 When new containers of labels are opened 
or rolls of labels are changed.
19 - 8 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person with an understanding of the 
nature of the controls such as trained 
production employees or quality control 
personnel. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action to a 
product involved in a critical limit deviation:
•	 Hold and isolate labeled product since the 
last acceptable inspection of labels;
AND
•	 Inspect 100% of affected product and 
relabel mislabeled products;
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control over the operation after a critical limit 
deviation:
•	 Inspect remaining labels staged for use and 
remove inaccurate labels from processing 
area;
AND
•	 Review a representative sample of labels 
in storage, and hold and isolate inaccurate 
labels, if appropriate; 
AND
•	 Discontinue use of label supplier;
OR
•	
Work with label supplier to ensure 
corrections are made to prevent recurrence;
AND
•	 Modify label procedures, as appropriate.
Establish a Recordkeeping System.
•	 Record of labeling checks of finished product 
packages.
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action records 
within 1 week of preparation to ensure they 
are complete and any critical limit deviations 
that occurred were appropriately addressed; 
AND
•	
Verify the product specification against raw 
materials ingredients’ label declarations at 
least annually and when changes to suppliers 
or formulation occur;
OR
•	 Verify the list of allergenic or food intolerance 
substance ingredients against raw materials 
ingredients’ label declarations at least annually 
and when changes to suppliers or formulation 
occur, if appropriate. 
19 - 9 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
TABLE 19-2
Control Strategy Example 1 – FINISHED PRODUCT LABEL EXAMINATIONS
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1.”  This example illustrates how a smoked fish processor can control undeclared major food 
allergens and food intolerance substances in the production of hot smoked sablefish.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Major food allergens and food intolerance causing substances may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other 
potential hazards. 
Example Only - See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s)
Critical 
Limit
Monitoring
What
Monitoring
How
Monitoring
Frequency
Monitoring
Who Corrective Actions(s) Records Verification
Finished 
product 
labeling
Undeclared 
major food 
allergens 
and food 
intolerance 
substances
Finished 
product 
labels must 
declare the 
presence of 
sablefish and 
Yellow No. 5 
The 
ingredients 
listing on 
finished 
product 
labels
Visual 
confirmation 
listing 
sablefish and 
Yellow No. 5 
on the label
One label at the 
beginning of 
the production 
of each lot and 
one label every 
hour thereafter
Quality 
control staff
Hold and isolate product 
labeled since last inspection;
Inspect affected product 
labeling and relabel 
mislabeled products;
Inspect remaining labels 
staged for use and remove 
inaccurate labels from 
processing area;
Review a representative 
sample of labels in storage, 
and hold and isolate 
inaccurate labels;
Work with label supplier to 
ensure corrections are made 
to prevent recurrence; and 
Modify label procedures 
Record of 
review of 
finished 
product 
labels
Review monitoring 
and corrective action 
records within 1 
week of preparation;
Verify product 
specification against 
raw materials 
ingredient’s label 
declaration at least 
annually and when 
changes to supplier 
or formulation occurs
19 - 10 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 – RECEIVING 
CONTROLS FOR PRE-PRINTED LABELS
NOTE: Assuring the accuracy of finished product 
labels may be accomplished through: a 
single CCP whereby monitoring both the 
ingredient declaration and application to 
the appropriate product are conducted 
in one CCP usually at the labeling step; 
OR two separate CCPs whereby the label 
ingredients declarations are monitored at 
another processing step such as receiving 
and the label application to the finished 
product (e.g., Control Strategy Example 
1) is monitored at the labeling step. This 
is an example of implementing a single 
CCP at the receiving step. 
All label declarations must meet FALPCA 
requirements.
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 Pre-printed labels list all food allergen and food 
intolerance substance ingredients.
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 The ingredients listing on pre-printed labeled 
packaging material.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Comparison of pre-printed labels against 
product specification;
OR
•	 Comparison of pre-printed labels against 
list of allergenic ingredients.
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 A representative number of containers from 
each lot received.
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person with an understanding of the 
nature of the controls such as trained 
production employees or quality control 
personnel.
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action to pre-
printed labels involved in a critical limit 
deviation:
•	 Refuse labels. 
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control of the operation after a critical limit 
deviation:
•	 Discontinue use of supplier;
OR
•	 Work with supplier to ensure corrections 
are made to prevent recurrence.
Establish a Recordkeeping System.
•	 Record of reviewing of pre-printed product 
labels. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation to 
ensure they are complete and any critical limit 
deviations that occurred were appropriately 
addressed. 
AND
•	 Verify the product specification against raw 
materials ingredients’ label declarations at 
least annually and when changes to suppliers 
or formulation occur, if appropriate; 
OR
•	 Verify the list of allergenic or food intolerance 
substance ingredients against raw materials 
ingredients’ label declarations at least annually 
and when changes to suppliers or formulation 
occur, if appropriate.
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
19 - 11 (August 2019)
TABLE 19-3
Control Strategy Example 2 – RECEIVING CONTROLS FOR PRE-PRINTED LABELS
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2.”  This example illustrates how a breaded fish processor can control undeclared major food 
allergens in the production of raw breaded fish fillets and fingers.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Major food allergens and food intolerance causing substances may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other 
potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides and metal fragments). 
Example Only - See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control Point
Significant 
Hazard(s)
Critical Limits
Monitoring
What
Monitoring
How
Monitoring
Frequency
Monitoring
Who
Corrective 
Action(s)
Records Verification
Receiving of 
pre-printed 
finished 
product labels 
Undeclared 
major food 
allergens 
Allergens 
(pollock, eggs, 
wheat, soy) 
accurately 
declared on 
labels
The ingredients 
are listed on 
pre-printed 
labels 
Visual 
comparison   of 
label against 
product 
specification
A 
representative 
number of pre-
printed finished 
product label 
rolls from each 
lot received
Quality control 
staff 
Refuse labels; 
and
Work with 
supplier 
to ensure 
corrections 
are made 
to prevent 
recurrence
Record of 
review of 
product labels 
Review 
monitoring 
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation;
Verify the 
product 
specification 
against raw 
materials 
ingredients’ 
label 
declarations at 
least annually 
and when 
changes to 
suppliers or 
formulation 
occur.
19 - 12 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 3 – RAW 
MATERIAL TESTING
Set Critical Limits.
•	 Less than 10 ppm sulfiting agents detected
NOTE: < 10 ppm sulfiting agents may be present 
in finished product shell-off shrimp and 
lobster without a sulfiting agent declaration 
on the label if the sulfiting agents have 
no functional (ongoing technical) effect in 
the finished food.  However, if the sulfiting 
agents have a functional (ongoing technical) 
effect in finished shell-on or shell-off shrimp 
or lobster product regardless of level, then 
they must be declared as ingredients on 
the product label).
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 The presence of sulfiting agents as an 
ingredient or sub-ingredient.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Screening test for sulfiting agents.
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 Representative sample from each incoming 
lot.
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person who is qualified by training or 
experience to perform the screening test 
procedure.
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action to a 
product involved in a critical limit deviation:
•	 Reject the lot.
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control of the operation after a critical limit 
deviation:
•	
Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidence is obtained that control of sulfiting 
agent content has improved. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System.
•	 Test results for sulfiting agents.
Establish Verification Procedures.
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action records 
within 1 week of preparation to ensure they 
are complete and any critical limit deviations 
that occurred were appropriately addressed.
19 - 13 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
TABLE 19-4
Control Strategy Example 3 – RAW MATERIAL TESTING  
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 3.”  This example illustrates how a processor of shell-on shrimp can control sulfiting agents 
that are used on the harvest vessel.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Major food allergens and certain food intolerance causing substances may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-3 (Chapter 3) for 
other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides and metal fragments). 
Example Only: See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical 
Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s)
Critical 
Limits
Monitoring
What
Monitoring
How
Monitoring
Frequency
Monitoring
Who Corrective Action(s) Records Verification
Shrimp 
receiving
Undeclared 
sulfiting 
agents
Less than 10 
ppm sulfites 
in shrimp
Each lot of 
raw material 
shrimp for 
sulfiting agent 
residual
Malachite green 
test
Representative 
sample from 
multiple locations 
in each lot 
received
Quality 
control 
staff
Reject any incoming lot 
of shrimp that contains ≥ 
10ppm of sulfiting agent; and 
Discontinue use of the 
supplier until evidence is 
obtained that control of 
sulfiting agents has improved
Test 
results for 
sulfiting 
agents
Review monitoring 
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week of 
preparation; and 
Annually conduct 
proficiency testing 
of QC personnel 
conducting 
malachite green 
testing
19 - 14 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 4 – REVIEW OF 
SUPPLIER DECLARATIONS OR LABELING
Set Critical Limits.
•	 Supplier’s certificate or declaration stating that 
sulfites have not been used;
OR
•	 Product labels do not declare the presence of 
sulfiting agents.
Establish Monitoring Procedures.
	What Will Be Monitored?
•	 Supplier’s certificate or declaration;
OR
•	 Raw material labels.
	How Will Monitoring Be Done?
•	 Review of supplier’s certificate or 
declaration;
OR
•	 Visual examination of raw material labels 
for sulfite declaration.
	How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)?
•	 Each incoming lot.
OR
•	 A representative sample of containers/
packages from each incoming lot.
	Who Will Do the Monitoring?
•	 Any person who understands the nature of 
the controls.
Establish Corrective Action Procedures.
Take the following corrective action to a 
product involved in a critical limit deviation:
•	 Reject the lot;
OR
•	 Hold the lot until a certificate or declaration 
can be provided by supplier;
OR
•	
Label finished product with appropriate 
sulfite declaration.
AND
Take the following corrective action to regain 
control over the operation after a critical limit 
deviation:
•	 Discontinue use of the supplier until 
evidence is obtained that certificates will 
accompany future shipments. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Suppliers’ declarations; 
AND
•	 Record of label review or review of supplier 
declaration.
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Collect at least one representative sample per 
quarter, randomly selected from each supplier, 
and analyze for sulfiting agents.  Additionally, 
collect at least one representative sample from 
each new supplier, and analyze for sulfiting 
agents;
AND 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action, and 
verification records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any critical 
limit deviations that occurred were appropriately 
addressed. 
19 - 15 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
TABLE 19-5
Control Strategy Example 4 - Review of Supplier Declarations or Labeling 
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 4.”  This example illustrates how a processor of shell-on shrimp can control sulfiting agents 
that are used on the harvest vessel.  It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  
Major food allergens and certain food intolerance causing substances may be only one of several significant hazards for this product.  Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for 
other potential hazards (e.g., environmental chemical contaminants, pesticides, and metal fragments). 
Example Only: See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Monitoring
(6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
Critical Control 
Point
Significant 
Hazard(s) Critical Limits
Monitoring
What
Monitoring
How
Monitoring
Frequency
Monitoring
Who Corrective 
Action(s) Records Verification
Shrimp   
receiving 
Undeclared 
sulfiting 
agents
Declaration 
or certificate 
stating sulfites 
were not used 
on the product
Suppliers’ 
certificate or 
declaration  
Review of 
certificate or 
declaration 
Every lot 
received
Receiving 
employee   
Hold lot until 
certificate or 
declaration is 
received;
Discontinue use of 
the supplier until 
evidence is obtained 
that certificates will 
accompany future 
shipments 
Certificates or 
declarations;
Receiving 
records 
documenting 
review of 
certificates or 
declarations
Collect at least one 
representative sample 
per quarter and test 
for sulfiting agents; in 
addition, test at least 
one lot from each new 
supplier and analyze 
for sulfiting agents;
Review monitoring, 
corrective action, and 
verification records 
within 1 week of 
preparation
19 - 16 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens nad Food Intolerance Substances 
•	 BIBLIOGRAPHY
We have placed the following references on display in the Division of Dockets Management, Food and 
Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see them at that 
location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of July 2018, FDA had verified the Web 
site address for the references it makes available as hyperlinks from the Internet copy of this guidance, 
but FDA is not responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-FDA Web site references after July 2018. 
•	 Kaja, A., B. Bedford, A. Eischeid, S. Bloodgood, J. Cluster, K. Swajian, and L. Jackson. 2018. Transfer 
of Shrimp Allergens in Shared Fryers. Food and Drug Administration, Institute for Food Safety and 
Health, and Illinois Institute of Technology. Poster.
•	
U.S. Congress. 2004. Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004. Title II of Public 
Law 108-282. Website: https://www.fda.gov/food/food-allergens-and-gluten-free-guidance-docu
ments-and-regulatory-information/food-allergen-labeling-and-consumer-protection-act-2004-falcpa
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. September 23, 1976. Termination of provisional listing and cer-
tification of FD&C Red No. 4 for use in maraschino cherries and ingested drugs. In Federal Register, 
vol. 41, no. 186.
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. July 9, 1986. Food labeling: declaration of sulfiting agents. Final 
rule, CFR Part 101. In Federal Register, 25012, vol. 51, no. 131.
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. May 29, 1992. Statement of policy: foods derived from new 
plant varieties. In Federal Register, vol. 57, no. 104.
•	
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1993. Substances prohibited from use in human food (cyclamate 
and its derivatives). In Code of Federal Regulations, CFR 21 189.135; 100.130. U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC.
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1997. Substances prohibited from use in human food (safrole). 
In Code of Federal Regulations, CFR 21 189.180. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. October 2003. Import sample collection assignment for undeclared 
sulfites - DFP #04-08. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and 
Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, College Park, MD.
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Substances prohibited from use in human food. In Code of 
Federal Regulations, CFR 21 74.1304, 74.2303, 81.10, 81.30. U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC.
•	
Wade, A. D. October 2005. Final status report on import sample collection assignment for undeclared 
sulfites - DFP #04-08. (Memorandum). Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Food and Drug Administration, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, College Park, 
MD.
19 - 17 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
-
NOTES:
19 - 18 (August 2019)
Chapter 19: Undeclared Major Food Allergens and Food Intolerance Substances
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Ingesting metal fragments can cause injury to 
the consumer.  These injuries may include dental 
damage, laceration of the mouth or throat, or 
laceration or perforation of the intestine.  FDA’s 
Health Hazard Evaluation Board has supported 
regulatory action against products with metal 
fragments 0.3 inch (7 mm) to 1 inch (25 mm) in 
length.  The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (the FFD&C Act) prohibits interstate commerce 
of adulterated foods (21 U.S.C. 331).  Under the 
FFD&C Act, a food containing foreign objects 
is considered adulterated (21 U.S.C 342).  See 
FDA’s “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 555.425. 
In addition, foreign objects that are less than 0.3 
inch (7 mm) may cause trauma or serious injury 
to persons in special risk groups, such as infants, 
surgery patients, and the elderly. 
Metal-to-metal contact (e.g., mechanical cutting 
or blending operations and can openers) and 
equipment with metal parts that can break loose 
(e.g., moving wire mesh belts, injection needles, 
screens and portion control equipment, and metal 
ties) are likely sources of metal that may enter 
food during processing. 
•	 
Control of metal inclusion 
Once introduced into a product, metal fragments 
may be removed from the product by passing it 
through a screen, magnet, or flotation tank.  The 
effectiveness of these measures depends on the 
nature of the product.  These measures are more 
likely to be effective in liquids, powders, and 
similar products in which the metal fragment will 
not become imbedded. 
Alternatively, metal fragments may be detected 
in the finished food by an electronic metal 
detector.  The use of electronic metal detectors 
is complex, especially with regard to stainless 
steel, which is difficult to detect.  The orientation 
of the metal object in the food affects the ability 
of the equipment to detect it.  For example, if a 
detector is not properly calibrated and is set to 
detect a sphere 0.08 inch (2 mm) in diameter, 
it may fail to detect a stainless steel wire that is 
smaller in diameter but up to 0.9 inch (24 mm) 
long, depending on the orientation of the wire as 
it travels through the detector.  Processing factors, 
such as ambient humidity or product acidity, 
may affect the conductivity of the product and 
create an interference signal that may mask metal 
inclusion unless the detector is properly calibrated. 
You should consider these factors when calibrating 
and using this equipment. 
Finally, the hazard of metal inclusion may also 
be controlled by periodically examining the 
processing equipment for damage that can 
contribute metal fragments to the product. This 
measure will not necessarily prevent metal 
fragments from being incorporated into the 
product, but it will enable you to separate products 
that may have been exposed to metal fragments. 
Visually inspecting equipment for damaged or 
missing parts may only be feasible with relatively 
simple equipment, such as band saws, small orbital 
blenders, and wire mesh belts.  More complex 
equipment that contains many parts, some of 
which may not be readily visible, may not be 
suitable for visual inspection and may require 
controls such as metal detection or separation. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
385 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether metal inclusion is a 
significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that metal fragments will be 
introduced at this processing step (e.g., do they 
come in with the raw material or will the process 
introduce them)? 
For example, under ordinary circumstances, 
it would be reasonably likely to expect that 
metal fragments could enter the process from 
the following sources as a result of worn, 
damaged, or broken equipment parts: 
•	 Mechanical crabmeat pickers; 
•	 Wire-mesh belts used to 
convey products; 
•	 Saw blades used to cut 
portions or steaks; 
•	 Wire from mechanical mixer blades; 
•	 Blades on mechanical chopping,
 
filleting, or blending equipment; 
•	 Rings, washers, nuts, or bolts from 
breading, batter, sauce cooling, liquid 
dispensing, and portioning equipment; 
•	 Injection needles; 
•	 Metal ties used to attach 
tags or close bags;
 
•	 Can slivers from opening cans. 
Under ordinary circumstances, it would not 
be reasonably likely to expect that metal 
fragments could enter the food from the 
following sources: 
•	 Utensils used for manual blending, 
cutting, shucking, or gutting; 
•	 Metal processing tables or storage tanks. 
2.	 Can the hazard of metal inclusion that was 
introduced at an earlier step be eliminated or 
reduced to an acceptable level at this processing 
step? 
Metal inclusion should also be considered 
a significant hazard at any processing step 
where a preventive measure is or can be 
used to prevent or eliminate the hazard 
(or is adequate to reduce the likelihood of 
its occurrence to an acceptable level) if it 
is reasonably likely to occur.  Preventive 
measures for metal inclusion can include: 
•	 Periodically checking equipment 
for damaged or missing parts; 
•	 Passing the product through metal 
detection or separation equipment. 
•	 
Control of metal inclusion 
In most cases, you should assume that the 
product will be consumed in a way that would 
not eliminate any metal fragments that may 
be introduced during the process.  However, 
in some cases, if you have assurance that the 
product will be run through a metal detector, for 
detection of metal fragments, or through screens 
or a magnet, for separation of metal fragments, 
by a subsequent processor, you would not need 
to identify metal inclusion as a significant hazard. 
Example: 
A primary processor produces frozen fish 
blocks by mechanically heading, eviscerating, 
and filleting fish in the round.  The primary 
processor sells exclusively to breaded fish stick 
processors and has been given assurance by 
these processors that the finished breaded 
product will be subjected to a metal detector.  
The primary processor would not need to 
identify metal inclusion as a significant 
hazard. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
386 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will also assist you 
in determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for metal inclusion: 
1.	 Will the product be run through a metal detector 
or a separation device, such as a screen, 
magnet, or flotation tank, on or after the last step 
where metal inclusion is identified as a significant 
hazard? 
a.	 
If it will be, you should identify final 
metal detection or separation as the 
CCP. Then processing steps prior to 
metal detection or separation would not 
require controls and would not need to 
be identified as CCPs for the hazard of 
metal fragments. 
Example: 
A breaded fish processor uses saws, 
breading and batter machines, and 
wire conveyor belts.  The processor 
should choose to use a metal detector 
on the finished product containers and 
should set the CCP for metal inclusion 
at the metal detection step for packaged 
products.  The processor would not need 
to have CCPs for this hazard at each of 
the previous processing steps at which 
there was a reasonable likelihood that 
metal fragments could be introduced. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 1 - Metal Detection or 
Separation.” 
You should recognize that by setting the CCP 
at or near the end of the process, rather than 
at the point of potential metal fragment entry 
into the process, you are likely to have more 
labor and materials invested in the product 
before the problem is detected or prevented. 
b.	 If the product will not be run through 
such a device, you should have 
procedures to periodically check the 
processing equipment for damage or lost 
parts at each processing step where metal 
inclusion is identified as a significant 
hazard.  In this case, you should identify 
those processing steps as CCPs. 
Example: 
A processor that cuts tuna steaks from 
frozen loins has identified the band 
saw cutting step as the only step that 
is reasonably likely to introduce metal 
fragments into the product.  The processor 
should identify the band saw cutting step 
as the CCP for this hazard and should 
check the condition of the band saw blade 
every 4 hours to ensure that it has not 
been damaged. 
This control approach is a control strategy 
referred to in this chapter as “Control 
Strategy Example 2 - Equipment Checks.” 
Visually inspecting equipment for 
damaged or missing parts may only be 
feasible with relatively simple equipment, 
such as band saws, small orbital blenders, 
and wire mesh belts.  More complex 
equipment that contains many parts, 
some of which may not be readily visible, 
may not be suitable for visual inspection 
and may require controls such as metal 
detection or separation. 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides two examples 
of control strategies for metal inclusion.  It is 
important to note that you may select a control 
strategy that is different from those which 
are suggested, provided it complies with the 
requirements of the applicable food safety laws 
and regulations. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
387 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following are examples of control strategies 
included in this chapter: 
MAY APPLY TO MAY APPLY TO 
CONTROL STRATEGY PRIMARY SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR PROCESSOR 
Metal detection or 
separation 
 
Equipment checks  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - METAL 
DETECTION OR SEPARATION 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All of the product passes through an 
operating metal detection or separation 
device; 
AND 
•	 No detectable metal fragments are in the 
product that passes through the metal 
detection or separation device. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The presence of an operating metal detection 
or separation device; 
AND 
•	 The product for the presence of metal 
fragments. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual examination for the presence of an 
operating electronic metal detector, magnet, 
intact screen, or flotation tank; 
AND 
•	 Product monitoring is performed by the 
metal detection or separation device itself. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Check that the metal detection or separation 
device is in place and operating at the start 
of each production day; 
AND 
•	 Continuous monitoring by the metal 
detection or separation device itself. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Monitoring is performed by the metal 
detection or separation device itself.  Visual 
checks to ensure that the device is in place 
and operating may be performed by any 
person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 When processing occurred without an 
operating metal detector or intact or 
operating separation device: 
Hold all of the product produced 
° 
since controls were last confirmed as 
functioning properly until it can be run 
through a metal detection or separation 
device; 
OR 
Hold all of the product produced 
° 
since controls were last confirmed as 
functioning properly until an inspection 
of the processing equipment that could 
contribute metal fragments can be 
completed to determine whether there 
are any broken or missing parts (may 
be suitable only for relatively simple 
equipment); 
OR 
Divert all of the product produced 
° 
since controls were last confirmed as 
functioning properly to a use in which it 
will be run through a properly calibrated 
metal detector (e.g., divert fish fillets to a 
breading operation that is equipped with 
a metal detector); 
OR 
Destroy all of the product produced 
° 
since controls were last confirmed as 
functioning properly; 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
388 
 
 
 
OR 
°	  Divert all of the product produced 
since controls were last confirmed as 
functioning properly to a non-food use.  
AND 
•	 When product is rejected by a metal detector: 
°  Hold and evaluate the rejected product; 
OR 
°  Rework the rejected product to eliminate 
metal fragments;
 
OR
 
°  Destroy the rejected product;
 
OR 
°  Divert the rejected product to a non-food 
use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control  
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Correct operating procedures to ensure 
that the product is not processed without 
an operating metal separation or detection 
device; 
OR 
•	 Attempt to locate and correct the source of 
the fragments found in the product by the 
metal detector or separated from the product 
stream by the magnets, screens, or other 
devices; 
OR 
•	 Repair or replace the metal separation 
device. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record documenting that the metal detection 
or separation device is in place and 
operating. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
For metal detectors: 
•	 De
velop sensitivity standards that are based 
on whether the potential hazard is ferrous, 
non-ferrous, or stainless steel, or obtain such 
standards from the equipment manufacturer. 
The standards should be designed to ensure 
that metal fragments will be detected in 
the product.  Conduct a validation study to 
identify the range of values for each of the 
processing factors over which the equipment 
will detect the standards that affect its 
operation in your product (e.g., ambient 
humidity and product acidity), or obtain such 
a study from the equipment manufacturer.  
The study should identify the appropriate 
equipment settings over the range of each of 
the processing factors.  The study also should 
consider the range of orientations in which 
the metal fragments may be present; 
AND 
•	 Challenge the metal detector using validated 
sensitivity standards daily, at the start of 
production, every 4 hours during operation, 
when processing factors (e.g., ambient 
humidity and product acidity) change, and at 
the end of processing; 
AND 
For all metal detection and separation devices: 
•	 Review monitoring, corrective action, 
and verification records within 1 week of 
preparation to ensure they are complete and 
any critical limit deviations that occurred 
were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
389 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
390 
TABLE 20-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - METAL DETECTION OR SEPARATION
This table is an example of a portion of a Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Metal Detection or Separation.”  
This example illustrates how a frozen fish sticks processor can control metal fragment inclusion. It is provided for illustrative purposes only.  
Metal inclusion may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., environmental 
chemical contaminants and pesticides and Staphylococcus aureus toxin formation in the hydrated batter mix).   
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Metal
detection 
Metal
inclusion 
All of the
product 
passes
through an
operating 
metal
detector 
Metal detector 
present and
operating 
Visual
examination 
Daily, at 
start of 
operations 
Production 
employee 
If the product is 
processed without
metal detection,
hold it for metal 
detection
Correct operating 
procedures to
ensure that the
product is not 
processed without
metal detection
Rework to remove 
metal fragments 
from any product 
rejected by the 
metal detector 
Identify the
source of the
metal found in the 
product and 
fix the
damaged
equipment 
Metal
detector 
operation 
log 
Conduct a 
validation study 
to determine
appropriate
settings for the metal 
detector
Develop metal detector 
sensitivity standards
Challenge the metal
detector with sensitivity 
standards daily,
before start-up, every 4 
hours
during production,
whenever 
processing factors 
change, and at the end of 
processing
Review 
monitoring,
corrective action and 
verification records within 
1 week of 
preparation 
No
detectable 
metal
fragments 
are in the
product 
passing the
through the
metal
detector 
The
product 
for the 
presence
of metal
fragments 
Electronic 
metal
detector 
Continuous Equipment
itself 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - EQUIPMENT 
CHECKS 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 No broken or missing metal parts from 
equipment. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will be Monitored? 
•	 The presence of broken or missing metal 
parts from equipment. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visually check the equipment for broken or 
missing parts. 
Examples: 
Check saw blades for missing teeth or 
° 
sections;
 
Check that all parts are present and 
° 
secure on blending equipment; 
Check for missing links or broken wires 
° 
on metal belts. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Check before starting operations each day; 
AND 
•	 Check every 4 hours during operation; 
AND 
•	 Check at the end of operations each day; 
AND 
•	 Check whenever there is an equipment 
malfunction that could increase the 
likelihood that metal could be introduced 
into the food. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has a thorough 
understanding of the proper condition of the 
equipment. 
E
stablish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product  
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	
 Hold all of the product produced since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check until it 
can be run through a metal detector; 
OR 
•	 Divert all of the product produced since 
the previous satisfactory equipment check 
to a use in which it will be run through a 
properly calibrated metal detector (e.g., divert 
fish fillets to a breading operation that is 
equipped with a metal detector); 
OR 
•	 Destroy all of the product produced since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check; 
OR 
•	 Divert all of the product produced since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check to a 
non-food use. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Stop production; 
AND 
•	 If necessary, adjust or modify the equipment 
to reduce the risk of recurrence. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Records of equipment inspections. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
Review monitoring and corrective action records 
within 1 week of preparation to ensure they are 
complete and any critical limit deviations that 
occurred were appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
391 
 
 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
392 
TABLE 20-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - EQUIPMENT CHECKS 
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Equipment Checks.”  This example illustrates how a frozen tuna steak processor
can control metal fragment inclusion. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Metal inclusion may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., scombrotoxin 
(histamine) and parasites). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Fish
cutting 
Metal
inclusion 
No damage or
missing parts to 
the saw blade 
Check the saw 
blade 
Visual
check 
Before 
start-up,
every 4 
hours during
operation,
at the end of
day, and after 
an equipment
jam 
Saw 
operator 
Stop production
Adjust 
equipment
Hold all of the
product since 
the last visual
check until
it can be run 
through a metal
detector 
Destroy rejected 
product 
Equipment
maintenance
log 
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1
week of 
preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Olsen, A. R. 1998. Regulatory action criteria 
for filth and other extraneous materials. I. 
Review of hard or sharp foreign objects as 
physical hazards in food. Regul. Toxicol. 
Pharmacol. 28:181-189. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1999. 
Foods - Adulteration involving hard or sharp 
foreign objects. In Compliance Policy Guides, 
Sec. 555.425. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Public Health Service, Food and Drug 
Administration, Center for Food Safety and 
Applied Nutrition, College Park, MD. 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
393 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 20: Metal Inclusion 
394
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create 
or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative 
approach if the approach satisfes the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss 
an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the 
appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
UNDERSTAND THE POTENTIAL HAZARD. 
Ingesting glass fragments can cause injury to the 
consumer. These injuries may include damage 
to teeth, laceration of the mouth and throat, or 
perforation of the intestine. FDA’s Health Hazard 
Evaluation Board has supported regulatory action 
against products with glass 0.3 inch (7 mm) to 1 
inch (25 mm) in length. The Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act (the FFD&C Act) prohibits 
interstate commerce of adulterated foods (21 U.S.C. 
331). Under the FFD&C Act, a food containing 
foreign objects is considered adulterated (21 U.S.C 
342). See FDA’s “Compliance Policy Guide,” Sec. 
555.425.Foreign objects that are less than 0.3 inch 
(7 mm) may cause trauma or serious injury to 
persons in special risk groups, such as infants, 
surgery patients, and the elderly. 
Glass inclusion can occur whenever processing 
involves the use of glass containers. Normal 
handling and packaging methods, especially 
mechanized methods, can result in breakage. Most 
products packed in glass containers are eaten with 
minimal handling on the part of the consumer 
providing little opportunity to detect glass inclusion. 
The purpose of this chapter is to address only the 
hazard of glass fragments that results from the use 
of glass containers. Glass fragments originating 
from sources such as overhead light fxtures must 
be addressed where applicable in a prerequisite 
sanitation program. The Procedures for the Safe 
and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and 
Fishery Products regulation, 21 CFR 123 (called 
the Seafood HACCP Regulation in this guidance 
document), requires such a program. 
•	 
Control of glass inclusion 
Once introduced into a product container, the 
hazard of glass fragments may be controlled 
by (1) removing the fragments by cleaning the 
containers before flling or (2) detecting the 
fragments by visual inspection before or after 
flling. Glass containers may be cleaned using 
water or compressed air and inverted during or 
after cleaning to help with glass removal. This 
measure may be suited only to processes that do 
not use automated flling systems which include 
flled container conveyors or capping equipment, 
because this equipment can result in glass 
breakage after glass container cleaning. 
The effectiveness of visual inspection depends 
on the nature of the product and the process. For 
most fshery products, this measure also may be 
suited only to processes that do not use automated 
flled container conveyors or capping equipment, 
because visual inspection after the glass containers 
are flled is not practical. However, for clear liquids 
(e.g., some fsh sauces), candling may be used to 
visually inspect all flled containers. Candling is a 
visual inspection process in which the container is 
illuminated from behind. 
Alternatively, the hazard of glass inclusion 
may be controlled by periodically checking 
the processing areas and equipment for glass 
breakage. This measure will not necessarily 
prevent glass fragments from being incorporated 
into the product, but it will enable you to separate 
products that may have been exposed to glass 
fragments. 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
395 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DETERMINE WHETHER THE POTENTIAL 
HAZARD IS SIGNIFICANT. 
The following guidance will assist you in 
determining whether glass inclusion is a 
significant hazard at a processing step: 
1.	 Is it reasonably likely that glass fragments will be 
introduced at this processing step (e.g., do they 
come in with the raw material or will the process 
introduce them)? 
For example, under ordinary circumstances, 
it would be reasonably likely to expect that 
glass fragments could enter the process 
during the processing of any product that is 
packed in a glass container.  These are likely 
areas of concern for glass containers: 
•	 Glass container receiving; 
•	 Glass container storage, when 
cases are moved mechanically; 
•	 Mechanized glass container cleaning; 
•	 Glass container conveyor lines; 
•	 Glass container filling; 
•	 Mechanized capping of glass containers; 
•	 Pasteurizing product in glass containers. 
2.	 Can glass fragments that were introduced at 
an earlier step be eliminated or reduced to an 
acceptable level at this processing step? 
Glass inclusion should be considered a 
significant hazard at any processing step 
where a preventive measure is or can be 
used to prevent or eliminate the hazard 
(or is adequate to reduce the likelihood 
of its occurrence to an acceptable level) if 
it is reasonably likely to occur. Preventive 
measures for glass inclusion can include: 
•	 Visually examining the 
empty glass containers; 
•	 Cleaning (water or compressed air) and 
inverting the empty glass containers; 
•	 Periodically monitoring processing 
lines for evidence of glass breakage; 
•	 Visually examining glass 
containers containing transparent 
liquid fishery products.
 
•	 
Intended use 
In most cases, you should assume that the 
product will be consumed in a way that would 
not eliminate any glass fragments that may be 
introduced during the process. 
IDENTIFY CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS. 
The following guidance will also assist you 
in determining whether a processing step is a 
critical control point (CCP) for glass inclusion: 
1.	 Will the containers be visually inspected for 
detection of glass fragments or be cleaned (water 
or compressed air) and inverted on or after the 
last step where glass inclusion is identified as a 
significant hazard? 
a.	 
If they will be, you should identify the 
final visual inspection or cleaning as the 
CCP. For example, you should visually 
inspect the containers for broken glass 
or clean and invert the containers after 
the processing steps where breakage is 
reasonably likely to occur. 
For most fishery products, this method 
may be suited only to processes that do 
not use automated filling systems which 
include filled container conveyors or 
capping equipment. However, if your 
product is a clear liquid, you should 
visually inspect all filled containers by 
candling. In this case, the candling step 
would be designated as the CCP. 
Example: 
A processor that manually packs 
caviar into glass jars has identified 
the glass container receiving and 
storage steps as the only steps that 
are reasonably likely to introduce 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
396 
 
 
 
 
glass fragments into the process. The 
processor should visually inspect 
each jar prior to the filling process. 
The processor should also collect a 
representative sample of inspected 
glass jars at the start of processing, 
every 4 hours during processing, at 
the end of processing and after any 
jams. The processor should identify 
the container inspection step as the 
CCP for this hazard. 
Example: 
Another processor that manually 
packs caviar has identified the glass 
container receiving and storage steps 
as the only steps that are reasonably 
likely to introduce glass fragments 
into the process. Just before filling, 
the empty glass jars are inverted and 
cleaned using filtered, compressed 
air. The processor should also collect 
a representative sample of cleaned 
glass jars at the start of processing, 
every 4 hours during processing, at 
the end of processing and after any 
jams. The processor should identify 
the container cleaning and inverting 
step as the CCP for this hazard. 
Example: 
A processor that bottles a transparent 
fish sauce has identified glass 
container receiving and storage, 
mechanical conveyor lines, 
mechanical filling, and mechanical 
capping as processing steps that 
are reasonably likely to introduce 
glass fragments into the process. The 
processor should visually inspect 
each filled and capped bottle for 
visible glass fragments by candling. 
The processor should also collect a 
representative sample of inspected 
glass jars at the start of processing, 
every 4 hours during processing, at 
the end of processing and after any 
jams. The processor should identify 
the finished product candling step as 
the CCP for this hazard. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 1 - 
Cleaning or Visual Inspection of 
Containers.” 
You should recognize that by setting 
the CCP at or near the end of the 
process, rather than at the point of 
potential glass fragment entry into 
the process, you are likely to have 
more labor and materials invested 
in the product before the problem is 
detected or prevented. 
b.	 If the containers will not be visually 
inspected or cleaned and inverted 
on or after the last step, you should 
periodically check the processing areas 
and equipment for glass breakage at each 
processing step where glass inclusion 
is identified as a significant hazard. In 
this case, those processing steps should 
be CCPs. It would not ordinarily be 
necessary to identify these steps as 
CCPs in addition to identifying a final 
inspection or cleaning step as a CCP. 
Example: 
A processor bottles clam juice and has 
identified glass container receiving 
and storage, mechanical conveyor 
lines, mechanical filling, and 
mechanical capping as processing 
steps reasonably likely to introduce 
glass fragments into the process. The 
processor should visually inspect 
all processing areas for broken 
glass at start-up and once every 4 
hours during processing. If broken 
glass is observed, the line should be 
stopped, the glass removed and the 
product that has moved through 
that area since the last inspection 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
397 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
placed on hold to be filtered or 
destroyed. The processor should 
identify glass container receiving and 
storage, mechanical conveyor lines, 
mec
hanical filling, and mechanical 
capping as the CCPs for this hazard. 
This control approach is a control 
strategy referred to in this chapter 
as “Control Strategy Example 2 - 
Equipment Checks.” 
DEVELOP A CONTROL STRATEGY. 
The following guidance provides examples of 
two control strategies for glass inclusion. You 
may select a control strategy that is different from 
those which are suggested, provided it complies 
with the requirements of the applicable food 
safety laws and regulations. The following are 
examples of control strategies included in this 
chapter: 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
MAY APPL
Y TO 
PRIMARY 
PROCESSOR 
MAY APPL Y TO 
SECONDARY 
PROCESSOR 
Cleaning or visual 
inspection of containers 
 
Equipment checks  
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CLEANING OR 
VISUAL INSPECTION OF CONTAINERS 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 All containers pass through an operating 
glass container inspection or cleaning 
process; 
AND 
•	 No detectable glass fragments are in glass 
containers that pass through the glass 
container inspection or cleaning process. 
Establish Monitor Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The presence of an operating glass container 
cleaning or inspection process; 
AND 
•	 Cleaned or inspected containers for the 
presence of glass fragments. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visual examination for the presence of 
equipment and employees for cleaning or 
inspecting glass containers; 
AND 
•	 Visual examination of a representative 
sample of glass containers after cleaning or 
inspecting. 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Check that the glass container cleaning or 
inspection process is in place and operating 
at the start of each production day and after 
each shift change; 
AND 
•	 Examine a representative sample of glass 
containers after cleaning or inspection daily, 
at the start of processing, every 4 hours 
during processing, at the end of processing, 
and after any breakdowns. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has an understanding of the 
nature of the controls. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Hold and evaluate all of the product 
processed since controls were last confirmed 
as functioning properly; 
OR 
•	 Destroy all of the product produced since 
controls were last confirmed as functioning 
properly; 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
398 
 
 
 
 
OR 
•	 Divert all of the product produced since 
controls were last confirmed as functioning 
properly to a non-food use; 
OR 
•	 Rework all of the product produced since 
controls were last confirmed as functioning 
properly to eliminate glass fragments by 
visually examining for the presence of glass 
or by running the product through a filter or 
screen. 
AND 
Take the following corrective actions to regain control 
over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Correct operating procedures to ensure that 
the product is not processed without an 
operating glass container visual inspection or 
cleaning process; 
AND/OR 
•	 Stop operations and locate and correct the 
source of the glass fragments. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Record documenting that the glass container 
cleaning or inspection process is in place 
and operating; 
AND 
•	 Record documenting the visual examination 
of glass containers after cleaning or 
inspection. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
399 
 
 
 
­
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
400 
TABLE 21-1
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 1 - CLEANING OR VISUAL INSPECTION OF CONTAINERS 
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 1 - Cleaning or Visual Inspection of Containers.”  This example illustrates how a pro
cessor of pickled herring in glass jars can control glass inclusion. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Glass inclusion may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-2 and 3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., parasites, scombro­
toxin (histamine), environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, unapproved food and color additives, metal fragments, Clostridium botulinum toxin formation, and 
pathogen growth as a result of temperature abuse). 
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Jar
cleaning and
inversion 
Glass
inclusion 
All
containers
pass through
an operating 
glass cleaning
process
No glass
fragments 
are in glass
containers
passing through
the glass
container
cleaning
process 
The
presence of the
glass cleaning
process
The
presence of
glass fragments 
in cleaned
containers 
Visual check 
Visual 
examination 
of a
representative 
sample of glass
containers after 
cleaning 
At the start of 
the
production and 
shift changes
One dozen jars 
after cleaning 
daily, at the 
start of 
processing,
every 4 
hours during
processing,
at the end of
processing,
and after any 
breakdowns 
Quality
control staff 
Hold all of the
product for an 
evaluation
Correct 
operating 
procedures to
ensure that the
product is not 
processed
without jar
cleaning
Stop
operations 
and locate and
correct the 
source of the
glass fragments 
Glass
inspection 
record 
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - EQUIPMENT 
CHECKS 
Set Critical Limits. 
•	 No broken glass on or near equipment. 
Establish Monitoring Procedures. 
»	 What Will Be Monitored? 
•	 The presence of broken glass on or near 
equipment. 
»	 How Will Monitoring Be Done? 
•	 Visually check the glass handling areas for 
broken glass. 
Examples: 
Check pallets and packing cases
 
° 
for damage, broken jars, and glass 
fragments; 
Check mechanical glass cleaning area for ° 
broken glass; 
Check floors around conveyors for broken 
° 
glass; 
Check filling and capping equipment and 
° 
surrounding floors for broken glass; 
Check glass containers for breakage 
° 
after exposure to heat (e.g., after heated 
product is added or after pasteurization). 
»	 How Often Will Monitoring Be Done (Frequency)? 
•	 Check before starting operations each day; 
AND 
•	 Check at least every 4 hours during 
operation; 
AND 
•	 Check at the end of operations each day; 
AND 
•	 Check whenever there is an equipment 
malfunction that could increase the likelihood 
that glass containers could be damaged. 
»	 Who Will Do the Monitoring? 
•	 Any person who has a thorough 
understanding of the proper condition of the 
equipment and surrounding area. 
Establish Corrective Action Procedures. 
Take the following corrective action to a product 
involved in a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Hold and evaluate all of the product 
produced since the previous satisfactory 
equipment check; 
OR 
•	 Destroy all of the product produced since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check; 
OR 
•	 Divert all of the product produced since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check to a 
non-food use; 
OR 
•	 Rework the product packaged since the 
previous satisfactory equipment check by 
visually examining for the presence of glass 
or by running the product through a filter or 
screen. 
AND 
Take one of the following corrective actions to regain 
control over the operation after a critical limit deviation: 
•	 Stop production; 
AND 
•	 If necessary, adjust or modify the materials, 
equipment, and/or processes to reduce the 
risk of recurrence; 
AND 
•	 Remove all broken glass from the equipment 
and surrounding area. 
Establish a Recordkeeping System. 
•	 Records of equipment and processing area 
inspections. 
Establish Verification Procedures. 
•	 Review monitoring and corrective action 
records within 1 week of preparation 
to ensure they are complete and any 
critical limit deviations that occurred were 
appropriately addressed. 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
401 
 
 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
402 
TABLE 21-2
CONTROL STRATEGY EXAMPLE 2 - EQUIPMENT CHECKS 
This table is an example of a portion of a HACCP plan using “Control Strategy Example 2 - Equipment Checks.”  This example illustrates how a processor of clam juice in
glass jars can control glass inclusion. It is provided for illustrative purposes only. 
Glass inclusion may be only one of several significant hazards for this product. Refer to Tables 3-3 and3-4 (Chapter 3) for other potential hazards (e.g., pathogens from the 
harvest area, environmental chemical contaminants and pesticides, natural toxins, unapproved food and color additives, and metal fragments).  
Example Only 
See Text for Full Recommendations
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
Glass bottle
receiving,
mechanical
bottle
conveyors,
mechanical
filling, and 
mechanical
capping 
Glass
inclusion 
No broken glass 
on or around
processing
equipment 
Broken glass 
on or around
equipment 
Visual check Before 
start-up, every 
4 hours during
operations,
after 
equipment
jams, and end 
of day 
Filler
Operator 
Stop
production 
Determine the 
source of the
broken glass  
Adjust 
equipment that
caused the
breakage, if 
necessary
Remove broken 
glass from the
area
Hold and
evaluate the 
product since 
the last
satisfactory 
check 
Glass
inspection 
record 
Review 
monitoring
and corrective 
action records 
within 1 week 
of preparation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday. As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Olsen, A. R. 1998. Regulatory action criteria 
for filth and other extraneous materials. I. 
Review of hard or sharp foreign objects as 
physical hazards in food. Regul. Toxicol. 
Pharmacol. 28:181-189. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 1999. 
Foods – Adulteration involving hard or sharp 
foreign objects. In Compliance Policy Guide, 
Sect. 555.425. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, Food 
and Drug Administration, Center for Food 
Safety and Applied Nutrition, College Park, MD. 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
403 
NOTES:
 
CHAPTER 21: Glass Inclusion 
404
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
This appendix contains a blank model Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) Plan Form 
and a blank model Hazard Analysis Worksheet. 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
405 
   
 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
406 
HACCP PLAN FORM
FIRM NAME: 
FIRM ADDRESS: 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION: 
METHOD OF DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE:
INTENDED USE AND CONSUMER:
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
SIGNATURE OF COMPANY OFFICIAL: __________________________________________________________  DATE: _________________________
PAGE 1 OF ______________________________ 
   
 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
407 
HACCP PLAN FORM
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
CRITICAL
CONTROL
POINT 
SIGNIFICANT
HAZARD(S) 
CRITICAL
LIMITS
FOR EACH
PREVENTIVE
MEASURE 
MONITORING 
CORRECTIVE
ACTION(S) RECORDS VERIFICATION
WHAT HOW FREQUENCY WHO 
SIGNATURE OF COMPANY OFFICIAL: __________________________________________________________  DATE: _________________________
PAGE 1 OF _____________________________ 
APPENDIX 1: FORMS B 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
408 
HAZARD ANALYSIS WORKSHEET
FIRM NAME: 
FIRM ADDRESS: 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION: 
METHOD OF DISTRIBUTION AND STORAGE:
INTENDED USE AND CONSUMER:
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
INGREDIENT/PROCESSING
STEP 
IDENTIFY POTENTIAL
BIOLOGICAL,
CHEMICAL, AND
PHYSICAL HAZARDS
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS 
PRODUCT AND
PROCESS 
ARE ANY POTENTIAL
FOOD SAFETY
HAZARDS SIGNIFICANT
AT THIS STEP? 
(YES/NO) 
JUSTIFY YOUR
DECISION FOR
COLUMN 3 
WHAT PREVENTIVE 
MEASURE(S) CAN BE
APPLIED FOR THE
SIGNIFICANT HAZARDS? 
IS THIS STEP A
CRITICAL CONTROL
POINT?
(YES/NO) 
 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
409 
HAZARD ANALYSIS WORKSHEET
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
INGREDIENT/PROCESSING
STEP 
IDENTIFY POTENTIAL
BIOLOGICAL,
CHEMICAL, AND
PHYSICAL HAZARDS
ASSOCIATED WITH THIS 
PRODUCT AND
PROCESS 
ARE ANY POTENTIAL
FOOD SAFETY
HAZARDS SIGNIFI­
CANT AT THIS STEP? 
(YES/NO) 
JUSTIFY YOUR
DECISION FOR
COLUMN 3 
WHAT PREVENTIVE 
MEASURE(S) CAN BE
APPLIED FOR THE
SIGNIFICANT HAZARDS? 
IS THIS STEP A
CRITICAL CONTROL
POINT?
(YES/NO) 
PAGE 1 OF _____________________________
 
NOTES:
 
APPENDIX 1: Forms 
410
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 2: Sample Product Flow Diagram 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
This appendix contains a sample product flow 
diagram that can be used as a model when you 
develop your own flow diagram. 
APPENDIX 2: Sample Product Flow Diagram 
411 
CONTROL STRATEGY 
FIGURE A-1 
SAMPLE PRODUCT FLOW DIAGRAM (SALMON FILLETS) 
RECEIVING 
$
FISH PUMP 
$
SORT 
$
REFRIGERATED STORAGE 
$
HEAD 
$
GUT 
$
WASH 
$
FILLET 
$
INSPECT 
$
FREEZE 
$
GLAZE 
$
WEIGH/PACKAGE 
$
FROZEN STORAGE 
$
SHIP 
APPENDIX 2: Sample Product Flow Diagram 
412 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
This appendix contains a decision tree that may 
be used to assist you with the identification of 
critical control points (CCPs). You should not rely 
exclusively on the decision tree, because error 
may result. 
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree 
413 
FIGURE A-2: CCP DECISION TREE 
DOES THIS STEP INVOLVE A HAZARD OF SUFFICIENT RISK AND SEVERITY TO Q1. WARRENT ITS CONTROL? 
YES NO NOT A CCP 
Q2. DOES CONTROL MEASURE FOR THE HAZARD EXIST AT THIS STEP? 
YES NO 
MODIFY 
THIS STEP
, 
PROCESS OR 
PRODUCT 
IS CONTROL AT 
THIS STEP 
NECESSARY 
FOR 
SAFETY? 
YES 
NO NOT A CCP STOP* 
IS CONTROL AT THIS STEP NECESSARY TO PREVENT, ELIMINATE OR Q3. REDUCE THE RISK OF THE HAZARD TO CONSUMERS? 
YES NO NOT A CCP STOP* 
CCP 
This decision tree is derived from one that was developed by the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree 
414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1992. 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point 
System. Intl. J. Food Microbiol. 16:1-23. 
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree 
415 
NOTES:
 
APPENDIX 3: Critical Control Point Decision Tree 
416
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
This appendix contains information on the growth 
and inactivation of bacterial pathogens. 
Table A-1 contains information on the minimum 
water activity (aw), acidity (pH), and temperature; 
the maximum, pH, water phase salt, and 
temperature; and oxygen requirements that will 
sustain growth for the bacterial pathogens that are 
of greatest concern in seafood processing.  Data 
shown are the minimum or maximum values, 
the extreme limits reported among the references 
cited.  These values may not apply to your 
processing conditions. 
Table A-2 contains information on maximum, 
cumulative time and internal temperature 
combinations for exposure of fish and fishery 
products that, under ordinary circumstances, will 
be safe for the bacterial pathogens that are of 
greatest concern in seafood processing.  These 
maximum, cumulative exposure times are derived 
from published scientific information. 
Because the nature of bacterial growth is 
logarithmic, linear interpolation using the 
time and temperature guidance may not be 
appropriate.  Furthermore, the food matrix effects 
bacterial growth (e.g., presence of competing 
microorganisms, available nutrients, growth 
restrictive agents).  Consideration of such attributes 
is needed when using the information in Tables 
A-1 and A-2. 
In summary, Table A-2 indicates that: 
For raw, ready-to-eat products: 
•	 If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure 
time (i.e., time at internal temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C) but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) 
should be limited to 2 hours (3 hours if 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the only 
pathogen of concern), 
OR 
Alternatively, exposure time (i.e., time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but 
below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited to 
4 hours, as long as no more than 2 of those 
hours are between 70°F (21.1°C) and 135ºF 
(57.2ºC); 
OR 
•	 If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but never 
above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure time at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) should be 
limited to 5 hours (12 hours if S. aureus is the 
only pathogen of concern); 
OR 
•	 The product is held at internal temperatures 
below 50°F (10°C) throughout processing, 
OR 
Alternatively, the product is held at ambient 
air temperatures below 50°F (10°C) throughout 
processing. 
For cooked, ready-to-eat products: 
•	 If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 80°F (26.7°C), exposure 
time (i.e., time at internal temperatures above 
50°F (10°C) but below 135ºF (57.2ºC)) should 
be limited to 1 hour (3 hours if S. aureus is 
the only pathogen of concern), 
OR 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
417 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternatively, if at any time the product is 
held at internal temperatures above 80°F 
(26.7°C), exposure time (i.e., time at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but below 
135ºF (57.2ºC)) should be limited to 4 hours, 
as long as no more than 1 of those hours is 
above 70°F (21.1°C); 
OR 
•	 If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 70°F (21.1°C) but never 
above 80°F (26.7°C), exposure time at 
internal temperatures above 50°F (10°C) 
should be limited to 2 hours (3 hours if S. 
aureus is the only pathogen of concern), 
OR 
Alternatively, if the product is never held at 
internal temperatures above 80°F (26.7°C), 
exposure times at internal temperatures 
above 50°F (10°C) should be limited to 4 
hours, as long as no more than 2 of those 
hours are above 70°F (21.1°C); 
OR 
•	 If at any time the product is held at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) but never 
above 70°F (21.1°C), exposure time at internal 
temperatures above 50°F (10°C) should be 
limited to 5 hours (12 hours if S. aureus is 
the only pathogen of concern); 
OR 
•	 The product is held at internal temperatures 
below 50°F (10°C) throughout processing, 
OR 
Alternatively, the product is held at ambient 
air temperatures below 50°F (10°C) 
throughout processing. 
Note that the preceding recommended 
critical limits do not address internal product 
temperatures between 40°F (4.4°C), the 
recommended maximum storage temperature 
for refrigerated fish and fishery products, 
and 50°F (10°C).  That is because growth of 
foodborne pathogenic bacteria is very slow 
at these temperatures and the time necessary 
for significant growth is longer than would be 
reasonably likely to occur in most fish and fishery 
product processing steps.  However, if you have 
processing steps that occur at these temperatures 
that approach the maximum cumulative exposure 
times listed in Table A-2 below for the pathogenic 
bacteria of concern in your product, you should 
consider development of a critical limit for 
control at these temperatures. 
It is not possible to furnish recommendations 
for each pathogenic bacteria, process, type of 
fish and fishery product, and temperature or 
combination of temperatures.  Programmable 
models to predict growth rates for certain 
pathogens associated with various foods under 
differing conditions have been developed by 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (Pathogen 
Modeling Program (PMP)) and the United 
Kingdom’s (Food MicroModel (FMM) program). 
These programs can provide growth curves 
for selected pathogens.  You indicate the 
conditions, such as pH, temperature, and salt 
concentration that you are interested in and the 
models provide pathogen growth predictions 
(e.g., growth curve, time of doubling, time of 
lag phase, and generation time).  FDA does not 
endorse or require the use of such modeling 
programs, but recognizes that the predictive 
growth information they provide may be of 
assistance to some processors.  However, you 
are cautioned that significant deviations between 
actual microbiological data in specific products 
and the predictions do occur, including those for 
the lag phase of growth.  Therefore, you should 
validate the time and temperature limits derived 
from such predictive models. 
Table A-3 contains information on the 
destruction of Listeria monocytogenes (L. 
monocytogenes).  Lethal rate, as used in this 
table, is the relative lethality of 1 minute at the 
designated internal product temperature as 
compared with the lethality of 1 minute at the 
reference internal product temperature of 158°F 
(70°C) (i.e., z = 13.5°F (7.5°C)).  For example, 1 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
418 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
minute at 145°F (63°C) is 0.117 times as lethal as 
1 minute at 158°F (70°C).  The times provided 
are the length of time at the designated internal 
product temperature necessary to deliver a 6D 
process for L. monocytogenes. The length of 
time at a particular internal product temperature 
needed to accomplish a six logarithm reduction 
in the number of L. monocytogenes (6D) is, 
in part, dependent upon the food in which it 
is being heated.  The values in the table are 
generally conservative and apply to all foods. 
You may be able to establish a shorter process 
time for your food by conducting scientific 
thermal death time studies.  Additionally, lower 
degrees of destruction may be acceptable in 
your food if supported by a scientific study of 
the normal initial levels in the food.  It is also 
possible that higher levels of destruction may be 
necessary in some foods, if especially high initial 
levels are anticipated. 
Table A-4 contains information on the destruction 
of Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum) type B 
(the most heat- resistant form of non-proteolytic 
C. botulinum).  Lethal rate, as used in this table, is 
the relative lethality of 1 minute at the designated 
internal product temperature as compared with 
the lethality of 1 minute at the reference product 
internal temperature of 194°F (90°C) (i.e., for 
temperatures less than 194°F (90°C), z = 12.6°F 
(7.0°C); for temperatures above 194°F (90°C), 
z = 18°F (10°C)). The times provided are the 
length of time at the designated internal product 
temperature necessary to deliver a 6D process 
for C. botulinum. The values in the table are 
generally conservative.  However, these values 
may not be sufficient for the destruction of non­
proteolytic C. botulinum in dungeness crabmeat 
because of the potential protective effect of 
lysozyme. You may be able to establish a 
shorter process time for your food by conducting 
scientific thermal death time studies.  Additionally, 
lower degrees of destruction may be acceptable 
in your food if supported by a scientific study of 
the normal innoculum in the food. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
419 
    
   
   
   
  
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
420 
TABLE A-1 
LIMITING CONDITIONS FOR PATHOGEN GROWTH
PATHOGEN MIN. AW
(USING SALT) 
MIN.
pH 
MAX.
pH 
MAX. % WATER 
PHASE SALT MIN. TEMP. MAX. TEMP. OXYGEN
REQUIREMENT
BACILLUS CEREUS 0.92 4.3 9.3 10 39.2°F
4°C 
131°F1 
55°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
CAMPYLOBACTER JEJUNI 0.987 4.9 9.5 1.7 86°F
30°C 
113°F
45°C 
micro­
aerophile2 
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM,
TYPE A, AND PROTEOLYTIC 
TYPES B AND F 
0.935 4.6 9 10 50°F
10°C 
118.4°F
48°C 
anaerobe3 
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM,
TYPE E, AND NON­
PROTEOLYTIC 
TYPES B AND F 
0.97 5 9 5 37.9°F
3.3°C 
113°F
45°C 
anaerobe3 
CLOSTRIDIUM PERFRINGENS 0.93 5 9 7 50°F
10°C 
125.6°F
52°C 
anaerobe3 
PATHOGENIC STRAINS OF 
ESCHERICHIA COLI 
0.95 4 10 6.5 43.7°F
6.5°C 
120.9°F
49.4°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
LISTERIA
MONOCYTOGENES 
0.92 4.4 9.4 10 31.3°F
-0.4°C 
113°F
45°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
SALMONELLA SPP. 0.94 3.7 9.5 8 41.4°F
5.2°C 
115.2°F
46.2°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
SHIGELLA SPP. 0.96 4.8 9.3 5.2 43°F
6.1°C 
116.8°F
47.1°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS 
GROWTH 
0.83 4 10 20 44.6°F
7°C 
122°F
50°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS 
TOXIN FORMATION 
0.85 4 9.8 10 50°F
10°C 
118°F
48°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
VIBRIO CHOLERAE 0.97 5 10 6 50°F
10°C 
109.4°F
43°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
VIBRIO
PARAHAEMOLYTICUS 
0.94 4.8 11 10 41°F
5°C 
113.5°F
45.3°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
VIBRIO VULNIFICUS 0.96 5 10 5 46.4°F
8°C 
109.4°F
43°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
YERSINIA ENTEROCOLITICA 0.945 4.2 10 7 29.7°F
-1.3°C 
107.6°F
42°C 
facultative 
anaerobe4 
1.   Has significantly delayed growth (>24 hours) at 131°F (55°C).
2.   Requires limited levels of oxygen.
3.   Requires the absence of oxygen.
4.   Grows either with or without oxygen. 
TABLE A-1 
LIMITING CONDITIONS FOR PATHOGEN GROWTH
PATHOGEN MIN. AW
(USING SALT)
MIN. 
pH
MAX. 
pH
MAX. % WATER 
PHASE SALT MIN. TEMP. MAX. TEMP. OXYGEN 
REQUIREMENT
BACILLUS CEREUS 0.92 4.3 9.3 10 39.2°F 
4°C
131°F1
55°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
CAMPYLOBACTER JEJUNI 0.987 4.9 9.5 1.7 86°F
30°C
113°F
45°C
micro-
aerophile2
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM, 
TYPE A, AND PROTEOLYTIC 
TYPES B AND F
0.935 4.6 9 10 50°F 
10°C
118.4°F 
48°C
anaerobe3
CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM, 
TYPE E, AND NON-
PROTEOLYTIC 
TYPES B AND F
0.97 5 9 5 37.9°F 
3.3°C
113°F 
45°C
anaerobe3
CLOSTRIDIUM PERFRINGENS 0.93 5 9 7 50°F 
10°C
125.6°F 
52°C
anaerobe3
PATHOGENIC STRAINS OF 
ESCHERICHIA COLI
0.95 4 10 6.5 43.7°F 
6.5°C
120.9°F 
49.4°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
LISTERIA 
MONOCYTOGENES
0.92 4.4 9.4 10 31.3°F 
-0.4°C
113°F 
45°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
SALMONELLA SPP. 0.94 3.7 9.5 8 41.4°F
5.2°C
115.2°F 
46.2°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
SHIGELLA SPP. 0.96 4.8 9.3 5.2 43°F 
6.1°C
116.8°F
47.1°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS 
GROWTH
0.83 4 10 20 44.6°F 
7°C
122°F 
50°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS 
TOXIN FORMATION
0.85 4 9.8 10 50°F 
10°C
118°F 
48°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
VIBRIO CHOLERAE 0.97 5 10 6 50°F 
10°C
109.4°F
43°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
VIBRIO 
PARAHAEMOLYTICUS
0.94 4.8 11 10 41°F 
5°C
113.5°F 
45.3°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
VIBRIO VULNIFICUS 0.96 5 10 5 46.4°F 
8°C
109.4°F 
43°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
YERSINIA ENTEROCOLITICA 0.945 4.2 10 7 29.7°F 
-1.3°C
107.6°F 
42°C
facultative 
anaerobe4
1. Has significantly delayed growth (>24 hours) at 131°F (55°C).
2. Requires limited levels of oxygen.
3. Requires the absence of oxygen.
4. Grows either with or without oxygen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
   
   
  
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
421 
TABLE A-2 
TIME AND TEMPERATURE GUIDANCE FOR  
CONTROLLING PATHOGEN GROWTH AND TOXIN FORMATION IN FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS 
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS CONDITION PRODUCT TEMPERATURE MAXIMUM CUMULATIVE 
EXPOSURE TIME 
GROWTH AND TOXIN FORMATION 
BY BACILLUS CEREUS 
39.2-43°F (4-6°C) 
44-59°F (7-15°C) 
60-70°F (16-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
5 days 
1 day 
6 hours 
3 hours 
GROWTH OF CAMPYLOBACTER JEJUNI 86-93°F (30-34°C) 
Above 93°F (34°C) 
48 hours 
12 hours 
GERMINATION, GROWTH, AND TOXIN 
FORMATION BY CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM 
TYPE A, AND PROTEOLYTIC TYPES B AND F 
50-70°F (10-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
11 hours 
2 hours 
GERMINATION, GROWTH, AND TOXIN 
FORMATION BY CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM 
TYPE E, AND NON-PROTEOLYTIC 
TYPES B AND F 
37.9-41°F (3.3-5°C) 
42-50°F (6-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
7 days 
2 days 
11 hours 
6 hours 
GROWTH OF CLOSTRIDIUM PERFRINGENS 50-54°F (10-12°C) 
55-57°F (13-14 °C) 
58-70°F (15-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
21 days 
1 day 
6 hours1 
2 hours 
GROWTH OF PATHOGENIC STRAINS OF 
ESCHERICHIA COLI 
43.7-50°F (6.6-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
2 days 
5 hours 
2 hours 
GROWTH OF LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES 31.3-41°F (-0.4-5°C) 
42-50°F (6-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
71-86°F (22-30°C) 
Above 86°F (30°C) 
7 days 
1 day 
7 hours 
3 hours 
1 hour 
GROWTH OF SALMONELLA SPECIES 41.4-50°F (5.2-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
2 days 
5 hours 
2 hours 
GROWTH OF SHIGELLA SPECIES 43-50°F (6.1-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
2 days 
5 hours 
2 hours 
GROWTH AND TOXIN FORMATION BY 
STAPHYLOCOCCUS AUREUS 
50°F (7-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
14 days 
12 hours1 
3 hours 
GROWTH OF VIBRIO CHOLERAE 50°F (10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
71-80°F (22-27°C) 
Above 80ºF (27ºC) 
21 days 
6 hours 
2 hours 
1 hour
2 
GROWTH OF VIBRIO PARAHAEMOLYTICUS 41-50°F (5-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
71-80°F (22-27°C) 
Above 80ºF (27ºC) 
21 days 
6 hours 
2 hours 
1 hour
2 
GROWTH OF VIBRIO VULNIFICUS 46.4-50°F (8-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
71-80°F (22-27°C) 
Above 80ºF (27ºC) 
21 days 
6 hours 
2 hours 
1 hour
2 
GROWTH OF YERSINIA ENTEROCOLITICA 29.7-50°F (-1.3-10°C) 
51-70°F (11-21°C) 
Above 70°F (21°C) 
1 day 
6 hours 
2.5 hours 
1.    Additional data needed. 
2.   Applies to cooked, ready-to-eat foods only. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
422 
TABLE A-3
INACTIVATION OF LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES
INTERNAL PRODUCT
TEMPERATURE (°F) 
INTERNAL PRODUCT
TEMPERATURE (°C) LETHAL RATE TIME FOR 6D PROCESS (MINUTES)
145 63 0.117 17.0 
147 64 0.158 12.7 
149 65 0.215 9.3 
151 66 0.293 6.8 
153 67 0.398 5.0 
154 68 0.541 3.7 
156 69 0.736 2.7 
158 70 1.000 2.0 
160 71 1.359 1.5 
162 72 1.848 1.0 
163 73 2.512 0.8 
165 74 3.415 0.6 
167 75 4.642 0.4 
169 76 6.310 0.3 
171 77 8.577 0.2 
172 78 11.659 0.2 
174 79 15.849 0.1 
176 80 21.544 0.09 
178 81 29.286 0.07 
180 82 39.810 0.05 
182 83 54.116 0.03 
183 84 73.564 0.03 
185 85 100.000 0.02 
Note: z = 13.5°F (7.5°C). 
 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
423 
TABLE A-4 
INACTIVATION OF NON-PROTEOLYTIC CLOSTRIDIUM BOTULINUM TYPE B
INTERNAL PRODUCT
TEMPERATURE (°F) 
INTERNAL PRODUCT
TEMPERATURE (°C) LETHAL RATE* TIME FOR 6D PROCESS (MINUTES)
185 85 0.193 51.8 
187 86 0.270 37.0 
189 87 0.370 27.0 
190 88 0.520 19.2 
192 89 0.720 13.9 
194 90 1.000 10.0 
196 91 1.260 7.9 
198 92 1.600 6.3 
199 93 2.000 5.0 
201 94 2.510 4.0 
203 95 3.160 3.2 
205 96 3.980 2.5 
207 97 5.010 2.0 
208 98 6.310 1.6 
210 99 7.940 1.3 
212 100 10.000 1.0 
Note: For temperatures less than 194°F (90°C), z = 12.6°F (7.0°C); for temperatures above 194°F (90°C), z = 18°F (10°C).
 *Note: These lethal rates and process times may not be sufficient for the destruction of non-proteolytic C. botulinum in dungeness crabmeat because of the potential that substances that may be naturally 
present, such as lysozyme, may enable the pathogen to more easily recover from heat damage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Abrahamsson, K., B. Gullmar, and N. Molin. 
1966. The effect of temperature on toxin 
formation and toxin stability of Clostridium 
botulinum type E in different environments. 
Can. J. Microbiol. 12:385-394. 
•	 Adams, M. R., C. L. Little, and M. C. Easter. 
1991. Modeling the effect of pH, acidulant, 
and temperature on the growth of Yersinia 
enterocolitica. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 71:65-71. 
•	 Adesiyun, A. A. 1984. Enterotoxigenicity of 
Staphylococcus aureus strains isolated from 
Nigerian ready-to-eat foods. J. Food Protect. 
47:438-440. 
•	 Ajmal, M. 1968. Growth and toxin production 
of Clostridium botulinum type E. J. Appl. 
Bacteriol. 31:120-123. 
•	 Ando, Y., and H. Iida. 1970. Factors affecting the 
germination of spores of Clostridium botulinum 
type E. Japan. J. Microbiol. 14:361-370. 
•	 Ando, Y. 1971. The germination requirements 
of spores of Clostridium botulinum type E. 
Japan. J. Microbiol. 15:515-525. 
•	 Aryanta, R. W., G. H. Fleet, and K. A. 
Buckle. 1991. The occurrence and growth of 
microorganisms during the fermentation of 
fish sausage. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 13:143-156. 
•	 Augustin, J. C., L. Rosso, and V. Carlier. June 
15, 2000. A model describing the effect of 
temperature history on lag time for Listeria 
monocytogenes. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
57(3):169-181. 
•	 Augustin, J. C., V. Zuliani, M. Cornu, and 
L. Guillier. 2005. Growth rate and growth 
probability of Listeria monocytogenes 
in dairy, meat and seafood products in 
suboptimal conditions. J. Appl. Microbiol. 
99(5):1019-1042. 
•	 Badhey, H., D. J. Cleri, R. F. D’Amato, J. 
R. Vernaleo, V. Veinni, J. Tessler, A. A. 
Wallman, A. J. Mastellone, M. Giuliani, and 
L. Hochstein. 1986. Two fatal cases of type 
E adult food-borne botulism with early 
symptoms and terminal neurologic signs. J. 
Can. Microbiol. 23:616-618. 
•	 Baird-Parker, A. C. 1971. Factors affecting 
the production of bacterial food poisoning 
toxins. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 34:181-197. 
•	 Baird-Parker, A. C., and B. Freame. 1967. 
Combined effect of water activity, pH and 
temperature on the growth of Clostridium 
botulinum from spore and vegetative cell 
inocula. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 30:420-429. 
•	 Baker, D. A., C. Genigeorgis, and G. Garcia. 
1990. Prevalence of Clostridium botulinum 
in seafood and significance of multiple 
incubation temperatures for determination 
of its presence and type in fresh retail fish. J. 
Food Protect. 53:668-673. 
•	 Baker, D. A., C. Genigeorgis, J. Glover, and 
V. Razavilar. 1990. Growth and toxigenesis 
of Clostridium botulinum type E in fishes 
packaged under modified atmospheres. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 10:269-290. 
•	 Baynes, N. C., J. Comrie, and J. H. Prain. 
1983. Detection of bacterial growth by the 
Malthus conductance meter. Med. Lab. Sci. 
40:149-158. 
•	 Beckers, H. J., F. M. van Leusden, and P. 
D. Tips. 1985. Growth and enterotoxin 
production of Staphylococcus aureus in 
shrimp. J. Hyg., Camb. 95:685-693. 
•	 Beltran, A., C. Pelaez, and A. Moral. 1989. 
Keeping quality of vacuum-packed smoked 
sardine fillets: microbiological aspects. Z. 
Lebensm Unters Forsch. 188:232-236. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
424 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
•	 Benedict, R. C., T. Partridge, D. Wells, and R. 
L. Buchanan. 1993. Bacillus cereus: aerobic 
growth kinetics. J. Food Prot. 56(3): 211-214. 
•	 Ben Embarek, P. K. 1994. Presence, 
detection, and growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in seafoods: a review. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 23:17-34. 
•	 Ben Embarek, P. K., and H. H. Huss. 1992. 
Growth of Listeria monocytogenes in lightly 
preserved fish products, p. 293-303. In H. H. 
Huss, et al. (ed.), Quality Assurance in the 
Fish Industry, Proceedings of an International 
Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark, August 
26-30, 1991. Elsevier Sci. Publ. B.V., Amsterdam. 
•	 Ben Embarek, P. K., and H. H. Huss. 1993. 
Heat resistance of Listeria monocytogenes in 
vacuum packaged pasteurized fish fillets. Int. 
J. Food Microbiol. 20:85-95. 
•	 Bergdoll, M. S. 1989. Staphylococcus aureus, 
p. 463-523. In M. P. Doyle (ed.), Foodborne 
microbial pathogens. Marcel Dekker, Inc., 
New York, NY. 
•	 Beuchat, L. R. 1973. Interacting effects of pH, 
temperature, and salt concentration on growth 
and survival of Vibrio parahaemolyticus. Appl. 
Microbiol. 25:844-846. 
•	 Beuchat, L. R. 1974. Combined effects of 
water activity, solute, and temperature on the 
growth of Vibrio parahaemolyticus. Appl. 
Microbiol. 27:1075-1080. 
•	 Beuchat, L. R., M. R. Clavero, and C. 
B. Jaquette. 1997. Effects of nisin and 
temperature on survival, growth, and 
enterotoxin production characteristics of 
psychrotrophic Bacillus cereus in beef gravy. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63(5):1953-1958. 
•	 Boutin, B. K., J. G. Bradshaw, and W. H. 
Stroup. 1982. Heat processing of oysters 
naturally contaminated with Vibrio cholerae 
Serotype O1. J. Food Prot. 45:169-171. 
•	 Boyd, J. W., and B. A. Southcott. 1971. Effects 
of sodium chloride on outgrowth and toxin 
production of Clostridium botulinum Type 
E in cod homogenates. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 
28:1071-1075. 
•	 Brocklehurst, T. F., and B. M. Lund. 1990. 
The influence of pH, temperature and 
organic acids on the initiation of growth of 
Yersinia enterocolitica. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 
69:390-397. 
•	 Bryan, F. L. 1979. Staphylococcus aureus. 
In Food microbiology: public health and 
spoilage aspects. The Avi Publishing Co., 
Inc., Westport, CT. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L. 1991. Microbiological 
criteria for cooked, ready-to-eat shrimp and 
crabmeat. Food Technol. 45:157-160. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L. 1991. Using spreadsheet 
software for predictive microbiology 
applications. J. Food Safety. 11:123-134. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L. 1993. Predictive food 
microbiology. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 4:6-11. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L., and J. G. Phillips. 1990. 
Response surface model for predicting the 
effects of temperature, pH, sodium chloride 
content, sodium nitrite concentration and 
atmosphere on the growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes. J. Food Prot. 53:370-376, 381. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L., and L. A. Klawitter. 1992. 
The effect of incubation temperature, initial 
pH, and sodium chloride on the growth 
kinetics of Escherichia coli. Food Microbiol. 
9:185-196. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L., and L. K. Bagi. 1997. Effect 
of water activity and humectant identity 
on the growth kinetics of Escherichia coli 
O157:H7. Food Microbiol. 14:413-423. 
•	 Buchanan, R. L., and M. L. Cygnarowicz. 
1990. A mathematical approach toward 
defining and calculating the duration of the 
lag phase. Food Microbiol. 7:237-240. 
•	 Campanini, M., A. Casolari, and S. Gola. 
1977. Bacterial growth and limiting pH. 
Industria Conserve. 52:326-331. 
•	 Carlin, F., C. Nguyen-the, and A. Abreu da 
Silva. 1995. Factors affecting the growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes on minimally 
processed fresh endive. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 
78:636-646. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
425 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Carlson, V. L., and G. H. Snoeyenbos. 
1972. Relationship of population kinetics 
of Salmonella typhimurium and cultural 
methodology. Am. J. Vet. Res. 33:177-184. 
•	 Casales, M. R., C. E. Del Valle, and C. L. 
Soule. 1985. Critical heating point for thermal 
processing of mussels in cans. J. Food Sci. 
50:836-837. 
•	 Catsaras, M., and D. Grebot. 1984. 
Multiplication des Salmonella dans la viande 
hachee. Bull. Acad. Vet. France. 57:501-512. 
•	 Chitchester, C. O., and H. D. Graham (ed.). 
1973. Microbial safety of fishery products. 
Academic Press, New York, NY. 
•	 Christiansen, L. N., J. Deffner, E. M. Foster, and 
H. Sugiyama. 1968. Survival and outgrowth 
of Clostridium botulinum type E spores in 
smoked fish. Appl. Microbiol. 16:553-557. 
•	 Cole, M. B., M. V. Jones, and C. Holyoak. 
1990. The effect of pH, salt concentration 
and temperature on the survival and growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 
69:63-72. 
•	 Colwell, R. R. (ed.), 1984. Vibrios in the 
environment. John Wiley Interscience, New 
York, NY. 
•	 Connor, D. E., V. N. Scott, D. T. Bernard, and 
D. A. Kautter. 1989. Potential Clostridium 
botulinum hazards associated with extended 
shelf-life refrigerated foods; a review. J. Food 
Safety. 10:131-153. 
•	 Cook, D. W. 1994. Effect of time and 
temperature on multiplication of Vibrio 
vulnificus in postharvest Gulf Coast shellstock 
oysters. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60:3483-3484. 
•	 Cook, D. W., and A. D. Ruple. 1989. Indicator 
bacteria and Vibrionaceae multiplication 
in post-harvest shellstock oysters. J. Food 
Protect. 52:343-349. 
•	 Cook, D. W., and A. D. Ruple. 1992. 
Cold storage and mild heat treatment as 
processing aids to reduce the number of 
Vibrio vulnificus in raw oysters. J. Food 
Protect. 55:985-989. 
•	 Cortesi, M. L., T. Sarli, A. Santoro, N. Murru, 
and T. Pepe. 1997. Distribution and behavior 
of Listeria monocytogenes in three lots of 
naturally-contaminated vacuum-packed 
smoked salmon stored at 2 and 10°C. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 37:209-214. 
•	 Craven, S. E. 1980. Growth and sporulation 
of Clostridium perfringens in foods. Food 
Technol. 34:80-87. 
•	 Curtis, L. M., M. Patrick, and C. de W. 
Blackburn. 1995. Survival of Campylobacter 
jejuni in foods and comparison with a 
predictive model. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 
21:194-197. 
•	 Dahl Sawyer, C. A., and J. J. Pestka. 1985. 
Foodservice systems: presence of injured 
bacteria in foods during food product flow. 
Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 39:51-67. 
•	 Dalgaard, P., and L. V. Jorgensen. 1998. 
Predicted and observed growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in seafood challenge tests 
and in naturally contaminated cold-smoked 
salmon. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 40:105-115. 
•	 Datz, M., C. Janetzki-Mittmann, S. Franke, 
F. Gunzer, H. Schmidt, and H. Karch. 
1996. Analysis of the enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli O157 DNA region containing 
lambdoidphage gene p and shiga-like toxin 
structural genes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
62:791-797. 
•	 Davies, A. R., and A. Slade. 1995. Fate of 
Aeromonas and Yersinia on modified-
atmosphere packaged (MAP) cod and trout. 
Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 21:354-358. 
•	 Deibel, K. E. 1995. Potential of 
Staphylococcus aureus to produce 
enterotoxin in fish batter at various 
temperatures, p. 33. In Medallion Lab (ed.), 
Proceedings of the IFT Annual Meeting. 
Medallion Lab, Minneapolis, MN. 
•	 Dengremont, E., and J. M. Membre. 
1995. Statistical approach for comparison 
of the growth rates of five strains of 
Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 61:4389-4395. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
426 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 DePaola, A., G. M. Capers, and D. Alexander. 
1994. Densities of Vibrio vulnificus in the 
intestines of fish from the U.S. Gulf Coast. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 60:984-988. 
•	 Destro, M. T., M. F. F. Leitao, and J. M. Farber. 
1996. Use of molecular typing methods 
to trace the dissemination of Listeria 
monocytogenes in a shrimp processing plant. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62:705-711. 
•	 Dickerson, R. W., and M. R. Berry, Jr. 1976. 
Heating curves during commercial cooking 
of the blue crab. J. Milk Food Technol. 
39:258-262. 
•	 Dickerson, R. W., Jr., and R. B. Read, Jr. 1973. 
Cooling rates of foods. J. Milk Food Technol. 
36:167-171. 
•	 Dickson, J. S., G. R. Siragusa, and J. E. Wray, 
Jr. 1992. Predicting the growth of Salmonella 
typhimurium on beef by using the 
temperature function integration technique. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 58:3482-3487. 
•	 Diez de Medina, D., G. Flick, R. Whittman, A. 
Diallo, and R. Croonenberghs. 1995. Growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes in fresh blue crab 
(Callinectes sapidus) meat in the presence 
of naturally occurring microflora during 
refrigerated storage, p. 178. In Institute of 
Food Technologists (ed.), Abstracts of IFT 
Annual Meeting 1995. Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute, Blacksburg, VA. 
•	 Dillon, R., and T. Patel. 1992. Listeria in 
seafoods: a review. J. Food Prot. 55:1009-1015. 
•	 Dillon, R., and T. Patel. 1993. Effect of cold 
smoking and storage temperature on Listeria 
monocytogenes in inoculated cod fillets 
(Gadus morhus). Food Res. Int. 26:97-101. 
•	 Dillon, R., T. Patel, and S. Ratnam. 1994. 
Occurrence of Listeria in hot and cold 
smoked seafood products. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 22:73-77. 
•	 Doyle, M. P. (ed.), 1989. Foodborne bacterial 
pathogens. Marcel-Dekker, New York, NY. 
•	 Doyle, M. P., and D. J. Roman. 1982 . 
Prevalence and survival of Campylobacter 
jejuni in unpasteurized milk. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 44(5):1154-1158. 
•	 Doyle, M. P., and D. J. Roman. 1981. Growth 
and survival of Campylobacter fetus subsp. 
jejuni as a function of temperature and pH. 
J. Food Prot. 44:596-601. 
•	 Duran, A. P., B. A. Wentz, J. M. Lanier, F. D. 
McClure, A. H. Schwab, A. Swartzentruber, 
R. J. Barnard, and R. B. Read. 1983. 
Microbiological quality of breaded shrimp 
during processing. J. Food Prot. 46:974-977. 
•	 Eklund, M. W., D. I. Weiler, and F. T. Poysky. 
1967. Outgrowth and toxin production 
of non-proteolytic type B Clostridium 
botulinum at 3.3 to 5.6°C. J. Bacteriol. 
93:1461-1462. 
•	 Eklund, M. W., F. T. Poysky, R. N. Paranjpye, 
L. C. Lashbrook, M. E. Peterson, and G. 
A. Pelroy. 1995. Incidence and sources of 
Listeria monocytogenes in cold-smoked 
fishery products and processing plants. J. 
Food Prot. 58:502-508. 
•	 Eklund, M. W., G. A. Pelroy, R. Paranjpye, M. 
E. Peterson, and F. M. Teeny. 1982. Inhibition 
of Clostridium botulinum types A and E 
toxin production by liquid smoke and NaCl 
in hot-process smoke-flavored fish. J. Food 
Prot. 45:935-941. 
•	 Elsea, W. R., W. E. Mosher, R. G. Lennon, 
V. Markellis, and P. F. Hoffman. 1971. An 
epidemic of food-associated pharyngitis and 
diarrhea. Arch. Environ. Health. 23:48-56. 
•	 El-Shenawy, M. A., and E. H. Marth. 1988. 
Inhibition and inactivation of Listeria 
monocytogenes by sorbic acid. J. Food Prot. 
51:842-847. 
•	 El-Shenawy, M. A., and E. H. Marth. 1988. 
Sodium benzoate inhibits growth of or 
inactivates Listeria monocytogenes. J. Food 
Prot. 51:525-530. 
•	 European Chilled Food Federation. 1997. 
Guidelines for good hygienic practice in the 
manufacture of chilled foods. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
427 
 
  
 
 
•	 Fantasia, L. D., L. Mestrandrea, J. P. Schrade,  
and J. Ya
ger. 1975. Detection and growth  
of enteropathogenic  Escherichia coli in soft  
ripened cheese. Appl. Microbiol. 29(2):179-185. 
•	 Fapohunda, A. O., K. W. McMillen, D. L. 
Marshall, and W. M. Waites. 1994. Growth 
of selected cross-contaminating bacterial 
pathogens on beef and fish at 15° and 35°C. 
J. Food Prot. 57:337-340. 
•	 Farber, J. M. 1991. Listeria monocytogenes in 
fish products. J. Food Prot. 54:922-924. 
•	 Farber, J. M. and J. Z. Losos. 1988. Listeria 
monocytogenes: a foodborne pathogen. Can. 
Med. Assoc. J. 138(5):413-418. 
•	 Fernandes, C. F., G. J. Flick, and T. B. 
Thomas. 1998. Growth of inoculated 
psychrotrophic pathogens on refrigerated  
fillets of aquacultured rainbow trout and 
channel catfish. J. Food Protect. 61:313-317. 
•	 Fernandez, P. S., S. M. George, C. C. Stills, 
and M. W. Peck. 1997. Predictive model of 
the effect of CO
2, pH, temperature, and NaCl 
on the growth of Listeria monocytogenes. Int. 
J. Food Microbiol. 37:37-45. 
•	 Fluer, F. S., and Y. V. Ezepchuk. 1970. 
Microbiologiya 39:396-410 (Source: 
Rhodehammel, E. J., and S. M. Harmon. 
Chapter 14.  Bacillus cereus.  In FDA  
bacteriological analytical manual, 8th ed. 
(1995). AOAC International, McLean, VA). 
•	 Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations. 1999. FAO Fisheries 
Report. No. 604, Report of the FAO expert 
consultation on the trade impact of Listeria  
in fish products. Rome, Italy. 
•	 Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations and World Health 
Organization. 2005. Microbiological Risk  
Assessment Series No. 8, Risk assessment of 
Vibrio vulnificus in raw oysters: interpretative 
summary and technical report. Rome, Italy. 
•	 Fuchs, R. S., and P. J. A. Reilly. 1992. The 
incidence and significance of Listeria 
monocytogenes in seafoods, p. 217-229.  In  
H. H. Huss, M. Ja
 kobsen, and J. Liston (ed.), 
Quality assurance in the fish industry. Proc. 
Int. Conf. August 26-30, 1991, Copenhagen. 
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam. 
•	 Fuhs, A., and G. J. Bonde. 1957. The 
nutritional requirements of Clostridium 
perfringens. J. Gen. Microbiol. 16:317-329. 
•	 Fujino, T., G. Sakaguchi, and Y. Takeda (ed.). 
1973. International Symposium on Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus. Saikon, Tokyo. 
•	 Garren, D. M., M. A. Harrison, and Y-W. 
Huang. 1994. Clostridium botulinum type E 
outgrowth and toxin production in vacuum 
skin packaged shrimp. Food Microbiol. 
11:467-472. 
•	 Garren, D. M., M. A. Harrison, and Y-W. 
Huang. 1995. Growth and production of 
toxin of Clostridium botulinum type E 
in rainbow trout under various storage 
conditions. J. Food Prot. 58:863-866. 
•	 Garthright, W. E. 1991. Refinements in the 
predict
 ion of microbial growth curves. Food 
Microbiol. 8:239-248. 
•	 Gay, M., O. Cerf, and K. R. Davey. 1996. 
Significance of pre-incubation temperature 
and inoculum concentration on subsequent 
growth of Listeria monocytogenes at 14 
degrees C. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 81(4):433-438. 
•	 George, S. M., B. M. Lund, and T. F. 
Brocklehurst. 1988. The effect of pH and 
temperature on initiation of growth of 
Listeria monocytogenes. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 
6:153-156. 
•	 George, S. M., L. C. C. Richardson, and M. W. 
Peck. 1996. Predictive models of the effect of 
temperature, pH, and acetic and lactic acids 
on the growth of Listeria monocytogenes. Int. 
J. Food Microbiol. 31:73-90. 
•	 Gibbs, P. A., A. R. Davies, and R. S. 
Fletcher. 1994. Incidence and growth of 
psychrotrophic Clostridium botulinum in 
food. Food Control. 5:5­ 7. 
•	 Gibson, A. M., N. Bratchell, and T. A. 
Roberts. 1988. Predicting microbial growth: 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
428 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growth responses of Salmonellae in a 
laboratory medium as affected by pH, 
sodium chloride and storage temperature. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 6:155-178. 
•	 Gill, C. O., and L. M. Harris. 1982. Survival 
and growth of Campylobacter fetus subsp. 
jejuni on meat and in cooked foods. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 44:259-263. 
•	 Godwin, G. J., R. M. Grodner, and A. F. 
Novak. 1977. Twenty-four hour methods 
for bacteriological analyses in frozen raw 
breaded shrimp. J. Food Science. 42:750-754. 
•	 Gooch, J. A., A. DePaola, J. Bowers, and D. 
L. Marshall. June 2002. Growth and survival 
of Vibrio parahaemolyticus in postharvest 
American oysters. J. Food Prot. 65(6):970-974. 
•	 Gould, G. W. 1999. Sous vide foods: 
conclusions of an ECFF botulinum working 
party. Food Control. 10: 47-51. 
•	 Gourama, H., W. Y. Tsai, and L. B. 
Bullerman. 1991. Growth and production 
of enterotoxins A and D by Staphylococcus 
aureus in salad bar ingredients and clam 
chowder. J. Food Prot. 54:844-847. 
•	 Goverde, R. L. J., J. G. Kusters, and J. H. J. Huls 
in’t Veld. 1994. Growth rate and physiology 
of Yersinia enterocolitica; influence of 
temperature and presence of the virulence 
plasmid. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 77:96-104. 
•	 Grecz, N., and L. H. Arvay. 1982. Effect 
of temperature on spore germination 
and vegetative cell growth of Clostridium 
botulinum. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 43:331-337. 
•	 Greenwood, M. H., E. F. C. Coetzee, B. 
M. Ford, P. Gill, W. L. Hooper, S. C. W. 
Matthews, S. Patrick, J. V. S. Pether, and R. 
J. D. Scott. 1985. The bacteriological quality 
of selected retail, ready-to-eat food products. 
III. Cooked crustaceans and mollusks. 
Environ. Health. 93:236-239. 
•	 Griffin, M. R., E. Dalley, M. Fitzpatrick, 
and S. H. Austin. 1983. Campylobacter 
gastroenteritis associated with raw clams. J. 
Med. Soc. N.J. 80:607-609. 
•	 Groubert, T. N., and J. D. Oliver. 1994. 
Interaction of Vibrio vulnificus and the 
Eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica. J. Food 
Prot. 57:224-228. 
•	 Guyer, S., and T. Jemmi. 1991. Behavior of 
Listeria monocytogenes during fabrication 
and storage of experimentally contaminated 
smoked salmon. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
57:1523-1527. 
•	 Halpin-Dohnalek, M. I., and E. H. Marth. 
1989. Staphylococcus aureus: production of 
extracellular compounds and behavior in 
foods - a review. J. Food Prot. 52:267-282. 
•	 Hanninen, M. L., H. Korkeala, and P. 
Pakkala. 1984. Growth and survival 
characteristics of Campylobacter jejuni in 
liquid egg. J. Hyg., Camb. 92:53-58. 
•	 Hany, O. E., R. Siddiqi, and M. A. Khan. 1993. 
Growth response of Listeria monocytogenes 
NCTC 7973 in two different media at four 
incubation temperatures. Ann. Acad. Med. 
Singapore, China. 22:300-302. 
•	 Harrison, M. A., Y-W. Huang, C-H. Chao, 
and T. Shineman. 1991. Fate of Listeria 
monocytogenes on packaged, refrigerated, 
and frozen seafood. J. Food Prot. 54:524-527. 
•	 Hathcox, A. K., L. R. Beuchat, and M. P. 
Doyle. 1995. Death of enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 in real mayonnaise 
and reduced-calorie mayonnaise dressing as 
influenced by initial population and storage 
temperature. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
61:4172-4177. 
•	 Hauschild, A. H. W. 1989. Clostridium 
botulinum, p. 111-189. In M. P. Doyle (ed.), 
Foodborne bacterial pathogens. Marcel 
Dekker, Inc., New York, NY. 
•	 Helmy, Z. A., A. Abd-El-Bakey, and E. 
I. Mohamed. 1984. Factors affecting 
germination and growth of Bacillus cereus 
spores in milk. Zbl. Mikrobiol. 139:135-141. 
•	 Hobbs, G. 1976. Clostridium botulinum and 
its importance in fishery products. Adv. Food 
Res. 22:135-185. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
429 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
•	 Holler, C., D. Witthuhn, and B. Janzen-
Blunck. 1998. Effect of low temperatures 
on growth, structure, and metabolism of 
Campylobacter coli SP10. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 64: 581-587. 
•	 Holley, R. A., and M. Proulx. 1986. Use of 
egg washwater pH to prevent survival of 
Salmonella at moderate temperatures. Poult. 
Sci. 65:922-928. 
•	 Hudson, J. A., and S. J. Mott. 1993. Growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes, Aeromonas 
hydrophila, and Yersinia enterocolitica on 
cold-smoked salmon under refrigeration and 
mild temperature abuse. Food Microbiol. 
10:61-68. 
•	 Hudson, J. A., and S. M. Avery. 1994. Growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes, Aeromonas 
hydrophila, and Yersinia enterocolitica on 
cooked mussel tissue under refrigeration and 
mild temperature abuse. J. Food Saf. 14:41-52. 
•	 Hughes, A., and A. Hurst. 1980. The effect 
of NaCl on the upper temperature limit for 
growth of and enterotoxin synthesis by 
Staphylococcus aureus. Can. J. Microbiol. 
26:507-510. 
•	 Huss, H. H. 1992. Development and use of 
the HACCP concept in fish processing. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 15:33-44. 
•	 Huss, H. H. 1997. Control of indigenous 
pathogenic bacteria in seafood. Food Control 
8:91-98. 
•	 Huss H. H., I. Shaeffer, E. R. Petersen, and 
D. C. Cann. February 1979. Toxin production 
by Clostridium botulinum type E in fresh 
herring in relation to the measured oxidation 
potential (Eh). Nord. Vet. Med. 1(2):81-86. 
•	 Hwang, C. A., and M. L. Tamplin. July 25, 
2005. The influence of mayonnaise pH and 
storage temperature on the growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in seafood salad. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 102(3):277-285. 
•	 Ingham, S. C., R. A. Alford, and A. P. 
McCown. 1990. Comparative growth rates of 
Salmonella typhimurium and Pseudomonas 
fragi on cooked crab meat stored under 
air and modified atmosphere. J. Food Prot. 
53:566-567. 
•	 International Commission on Microbiological 
Specifications for Foods. 1996. 
Microorganisms in foods 5. Characteristics 
of microbial pathogens. ICMSF, International 
Union of Biological Societies. Blackie 
Academic & Professional, London, England. 
•	 Islam, M. S., M. K. Hasan, and S. I. Khan. 
1993. Growth and survival of Shigella 
flexneri in common Bangladeshi foods under 
various conditions of time and temperature. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59:652-654. 
•	 James, D. G., and J. Olley. 1971. Spoilage of 
shark. Aust. Fish. 30:11-13. 
•	 Jemmi, T., and A. Keusch. 1992. Behavior of 
Listeria monocytogenes during processing 
and storage of experimentally contaminated 
hot-smoked trout. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
15:339-346. 
•	 Johnson, K. M., C. L. Nelson, and F. F. 
Busta. 1983. Influence of temperature on 
germination and growth of spores of emetic 
and diarrheal strains of Bacillus cereus in 
a broth medium and in rice. J. Food Sci. 
48: 286-287. Jones, J. E., S. J. Walker, J. P. 
Sutherland, M. W. Peck, and C. L. Little. 
1994. Mathematical modeling of the growth, 
survival and death of Yersinia enterocolitica. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 23:433-447. 
•	 Jorgensen, L. V., and H. H. Huss. 1998. 
Prevalence and growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in naturally contaminated 
seafood. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 42:127-131. 
•	 Juneja, V. K., and B. S. Marmer. 1996. Growth 
of Clostridium perfringens from spore 
inocula in sous-vide products. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 32:115-123. 
•	 Juneja, V. K., B. S. Marmer, J. G. Phillips, 
and S. A. Palumbo. 1996. Interactive effects 
of temperature, initial pH, sodium chloride, 
and sodium pyrophosphate on the growth 
kinetics of Clostridium perfringens. J. Food 
Prot. 59: 963-968. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
430 
•	 Juneja, V. K
., J. E. Call, B. S. Marmer, and 
A. J. Miller. 1994. The effect of temperature 
abuse on Clostridium perfringens in cooked 
turkey stored under air and vacuum. Food 
Microbiol. 11:187-193. 
•	 Jyhshium, L., S. L. In, J. L. Slonczewski, and 
J. W. Foster. 1995. Comparative analysis 
of extreme acid survival in Salmonella  
typhimurium, Shigella flexneri, and 
Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 177:4097-4104. 
•	 Kaneko, T., and R. R. Colwell. 1973. Ecology 
of  Vibrio parahaemolyticus in Chesapeake 
Bay. J. Bacteriol. 113:24-32. 
•	 Kang, C. K., M. Woodburn, A. Pagenkopf, 
and R. Cheney. 1969. Growth, sporulation, 
and germination of Clostridium perfringens 
in media of controlled water activity. Appl. 
Microbiol. 18:798-805. 
•	 Karim, P., and B. Embarek. 1994. 
Presence, detection, and growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes  in sea-foods: a review. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 23:17-34. 
•	 Kaspar, C. W., and M. L. Tamplin. 1993. 
Effects of temperature and salinity on the 
survival of Vibrio vulnificus in seawater and 
shellfish. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59:2425
2429. 
•	 Kauppi, K. L., S. R. Tatini, F. Harrell, and 
P. Feng. 1996. Influence of substrate and 
low temperature on growth and survival 
of verotoxigenic  Escherichia coli. Food 
Microbiol. 13:397-405. 
•	 Kelana, L. C., and M. W. Griffiths. 
2003. Growth of autobioluminescent 
Campylobacter jejuni in response to various 
environmental conditions.  J. Food Prot. 
66:1190-1197. 
•	 Koff, R. S., and H. S. Sear. 1967. Internal 
temperature of steamed clams. New Engl. J. 
Med. 276:737-739. 
•	 Kramer, J. M., and J. M. Gilbert. Chapter 2, 
Bacillus cereus  and other Bacillus  species. In
Foodborne bacterial pathogens, M. P. Doyle 
(ed.), Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, NY. 
•	 Krieg, N. R. (ed.), 1984. Bergey’s manual of 
systematic bacteriology, vol. 1. Williams & 
Wilkins, Baltimore, MD. 
•	 Lachia, R. V., G. J. Silverman, and R. 
Sharp. 1988. Guide to the salvage of 
temperature-abused food products in military  
commissaries. Technical Report on Project 
No. AAF87-12,II. U.S. Army Natick Research, 
Development and Engineering Center, Natick, 
MA. 
•	 Lappi, V. R., A. Ho, K. Gall, and M. 
Wiedmann. 2004. Prevalence and growth of 
Listeria on naturally contaminated smoked  
salmon over 28 days of storage at 4 degrees 
C. J. Food Prot. 67(5):1022-1026.  
•	 Leung, C-K., Y-W. Huang, and O. C. 
Pancorbo. 1992. Bacteria pathogens and 
indicators in catfish and pond environments. 
J. Food Prot. 55:424-427. 
•	 Lindberg, C. W., and E. Borch. 1994. 
Predicting the aerobic growth of Yersinia  
enterocolitica O:3 at different pH-values, 
temperatures and L-lactate concentrations 
using conductance measurements. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 22:141-153. 
•	 Little, C. L., and S. Knochel. 1994. Growth 
and survival of Yersinia enterocolitica, 
Salmonella,  and Bacillus cereus in brie stored 
at 4, 8, and 20°C. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
24:137-145. 
•	 Lotter, L. P., and L. Leistner. 1978. Minimal 
water activity for enterotoxin A production 
and growth of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl.  
Environ. Microbiol. 36:377-380. 
•	 Lu, J. Y., R. D. Pace, and W. D. Plahar. 1991. 
Storage conditions and microbial quality of 
smoked dry herring in Ghana. J. Food Prot. 
54:557-559. 
•	 Lund, B. M., A. F. Graham, S. M. George, 
and D. Brown. 1990. The combined effect 
of incubation temperature, pH, and sorbic 
  acid on the probability of growth of non
proteolytic, type B Clostridium botulinum. J. 
Appl. Bacteriol. 69:481-492. 
­
­
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
431 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
•	 Macke y, B. M., and N. Bratchell. 1989.  
A review: the heat resistance of Listeria 
monocytogenes. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 9:89-94.  
•	 Mackey, B. M., T. A. Roberts, J. Mansfield, 
and G. Farkas. 1980. Growth of Salmonella  
on chilled meat. J. Hyg., Camb. 85:115-124. 
•	 Matches, J. R. 1982. Microbial changes 
in packages, p. 46-70.  In R. Martin (ed.), 
Proceedings of the First National Conference 
on Seafood Packaging and Shipping. National
Fisheries Institute, Seattle, WA. 
•	 Matches, J. R., and J. Liston. 1968. Low 
temperature growth of Salmonella. J. Food 
Sci. 33:641-645. 
•	 Matches, J. R., and J. Liston. 1972. Effect 
of pH on low temperature growth of 
Salmonella. J. Milk Food Technol. 35:49-52. 
•	 Matches, J. R., J. Liston, and L. P. Daneault. 
1971. Survival of Vibrio parahaemolyticus  
in fish homogenate during storage at low 
temperature. Appl. Microbiol. 21:951-952. 
•	 Maurelli, A. T., B. Blackmon, and R. Curtiss, 
III. 1984. Temperature-dependent expression 
of virulence genes in Shigella species. Infect. 
Immun. 43:195-201. 
•	 McClure, P. J., A. L. Beaumont, J. P. 
Sutherland, and T. A. Roberts. March 3, 1997. 
Predictive modeling of growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes. The effects on growth of 
NaCl, pH, storage temperature and NaNO
2. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 34(3):221-232. 
•	 McElroy, D. M., L.-A. Jaykus, and P. M. 
Foegeding. February 2000. Validation and 
analysis of modeled predictions of growth of 
Bacillus cereus spores in boiled rice. J. Food 
Prot. 63(2):268–272. 
•	 Microbial Food Safety Research Unit. 
December 12, 2005. Pathogen Modeling 
Program 7.0 version 1.1.1433.15425. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Agriculture  
Research Service. http://www.ars.usda.gov/ 
Services/docs.htm?docid=6788. 
•	 Miles, D. W., T. Ross, J. Olley, and T. 
A. McMeekin. 1997. Development and 
evaluati
 on of a predictive model for the 
effect of temperature and water activity on 
the growth rate of Vibrio parahaemolyticus. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 38:133-142. 
•	 Molin, G., and I-M. Stenstroem. 1984. Effect 
of temperature on the microbial flora of 
herring fillets stored in air of carbon dioxide. 
J. Appl. Bacteriol. 56:275-282. 
•	 Molin, G., I-M. Stenstroem, and A. 
 Ternstroem. 1983. The microbial flora of 
herring fillets after storage in carbon dioxide, 
nitrogen, or air at 2 degrees C. J. Appl. 
Bacteriol. 55:49-56. 
•	 Motes, M. L., Jr. 1991. Incidence of Listeria 
spp. in shrimp, oysters, and estuarine waters. 
J. Food Prot. 54:170-173. 
•	 Murphree, R. L., and M. L. Tamplin. 1995. 
Uptake and retention of Vibrio cholerae O1 
in the eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61:3656-3660. 
•	 Murphy, S. K., and J. D. Oliver. 1992. 
Effects of temperature abuse on survival of 
Vibrio vulnificus in oysters. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 58(9):2771-2775. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbio
logical Criteria for Foods. 1991. 
Listeria monocytogenes: Recommendations 
of the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 14:185-246. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1992. 
Microbiological criteria for raw molluscan 
shellfish. J. Food Prot. 55:463-480. 
•	 National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods. 1992. 
Vacuum or modified atmosphere packaging 
for refrigerated raw fishery products. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and 
Inspection Service, Executive Secretariat, 
Washington, DC. 
•	 Olmez, H. K., and N. Aran. 2005. Modeling 
the growth kinetics of Bacillus cereus as a 
function of temperature, pH, sodium lactate 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
432 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and sodium chloride concentrations.  Int. J. 
Food M
icrobiol. 98(2):135-143. 
•	 Ostovar, K., and M. J. Bremier. 1975. Effect of 
thawing on growth of Staphylococcus aureus  
in frozen convenience food items. J. Milk 
Food Technol. 38:337-339. 
•	 Palumbo, S. A., J. E. Call, F. J. Schultz, and A. 
C. Williams. 1995. Minimum and maximum 
temperatures for growth and enterotoxin 
production by hemorrhagic strains of 
Escherichia coli. J. Food Protect. 58:352-356. 
•	 Pedrosa-Menabrito, A., and J. M. Regenstein. 
1988. Shelf-life extension of fresh fish - a 
review. Part I - Spoilage of fish. J. Food Qual. 
11:117-127. 
•	 Pedrosa-Menabrito, A., and J. M. Regenstein. 
1990. Shelf-life extension of fresh fish - a 
review. Part II - Preservation of fish. J. Food 
Qual. 13:129-146. 
•	 Pelroy, G., M. Peterson, R. Paranjpye, J. 
Almond, and M. Eklund. 1994. Inhibition 
of  Listeria monocytogenes in cold-process  
(smoked) salmon by sodium nitrite and 
packaging method. J. Food Prot. 57:114-119. 
•	 Pelroy, G. A., M. W. Eklund, R. N. Paranjpye, 
E. M. Suzuki, and M. E. Peterson. 1982. 
Inhibition of Clostridium botulinum types A 
and E toxin formation by sodium nitrite and 
sodium chloride in hot-process (smoked) 
salmon. J. Food Prot. 45:833-841. 
•	 Peters, A. C., L. Thomas, and J. W. T. 
Wimpenny. 1991. Effects of salt concentration 
on bacterial growth on plates with gradients 
of pH and temperature. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
77:309-314. 
•	 Peterson, M. E., G. A. Pelroy, F. T. Poysky, R.  
N. Paranjpye, R. M. Dong, G. M. Pigott, and M.  
W. Eklund. 1997. Heat-pasteurization process  
for inactivation of nonproteolytic types of  
Clostridium botulinum in picked dungeness  
crabmeat. J. Food Prot. 60:928-934. 
•	 Peterson, M. E., G. A. Pelroy, R. N. Paranjpye, 
F. T. Poysky, J. S. Almond, and M. W. Eklund. 
1993. Parameters for control of  Listeria 
monocytog
enes in smoked fishery products: 
sodium chloride and packaging method. J. 
Food Prot. 56:938-943. 
•	 Potter, L., and L. Leistner. 1978. Minimal 
water activity for enterotoxin A production 
and growth of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 36:377-380. 
•	 Pradhan, L., P. Kanekar, and S. H. Godbole. 
1985. Microbiology of spoiled mango pickles. 
Tolerance to salt, acidity, and oil of the 
microbes isolated from spoiled mango pickles. 
J. Food Sci. Technol. India 22:339-341. 
•	 Presser, K. A., T. Ross, and D. A. Ratkowsky. 
1998. Modeling the growth limits (growth/ 
no growth interface) of Escherichia coli as 
a function of temperature, pH, lactic acid 
concentration, and water activity. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 64: 1773-1779. 
•	 Prost, E., and H. Riemann. 1967. Food-borne 
salmonellosis. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 21:495-528. 
•	 Raj, H. D. 1970. Public health bacteriology of 
processed frozen foods. Lab. Pract. 19:374­
377, 394. 
•	 Ratkowsky, D. A., J. Olley, T. A. McMeekin, 
and A. Ball. 1982. Relationship between 
temperature and growth rate of bacterial 
cultures. J. Bacteriol. 149:1-5. 
•	 Ratkowsky, D. A., R. K. Lowry, T. A. 
McMeekin, A. N. Stokes, and R. E. Chandler. 
1983. Model for bacterial culture growth rate 
throughout the entire biokinetic temperature 
range. J. Bacteriol. 154:1222-1226. 
•	 
Reddy, N. R., A. Paradis, M. G. Roman, 
H. M. Solomon, and E. J. Rhodehamel. 
(1996). Toxin development by 
Clostridium 
botulinum in modified atmosphere-packaged 
fresh tilapia fillets during storage. J. Food Sci. 
61:632-635. 
•	 Reed, G. H. 1993. Foodborne illness (Part 
2): Salmonellosis. Dairy, Food, Environ. San. 
13:706. 
•	 Reed, G. H. 1994. Foodborne illness (Part 3): 
Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis. Dairy, 
Food, Environ. San. 14:16-17. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
433 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Reed, G. H. 1994. Foodborne illness (Part 4): 
Bacillus cereus gastroenteritis. Dairy, Food, 
Environ. San. 14:87. 
•	 Reed, G. H. 1994. Foodborne illness (Part 8): 
Escherichia coli Dairy, Food, Environ. San. 
14:329-330. 
•	 Reed, G. H. 1994. Foodborne illness (Part 11): 
Yersinosis. Dairy, Food, Environ. San. 14:536. 
•	 Rey, C. R., H. W. Walker, and P. L. 
Rohrbaugh. 1975. The influence of 
temperature on growth, sporulation, and 
heat resistance of spores of six strains 
of Clostridium perfringens. J. Milk Food 
Technol. 38:461-465. 
•	 Richards, J. C. S., A. C. Jason, G. Hobbs, 
D. M. Gibson, and R. H. Christie. 1978. 
Electronic measurement of bacterial growth. 
J. Phys. E.: Sci. Instrum. 11:560-568. 
•	 Rober
ts, D., and R. J. Gilbert. 1979. Survival 
and growth of non-cholera vibrios in various 
foods. J. Hyg., Camb. 82:123-131. 
•	 Roberts, T. A., and A. M. Gibson. 1983. 
Chemical methods for controlling 
Clostridium botulinum in processed meats. 
Food Technol. 40:163-171, 176. 
•	 Roberts, T. A., and C. M. Derrick. 1978. 
The effect of curing salts on the growth of 
Clostridium perfringens (welchii) in a laboratory 
medium. J. Food Technol. 13:394-353. 
•	 Roberts, T. A., and G. Hobbs. 1968. Low 
temperature growth characteristics of 
clostridia. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 31:75-88. 
•	 Romick, T. L., H. P. Fleming, and R. F. 
McFeeters. 1996. Aerobic and anaerobic 
metabolism of Listeria monocytogenes in 
defined glucose medium. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 62:304-307. 
•	 Rørvik, L. M., and M. Yndestad. 1991. Listeria 
monocytogenes in foods in Norway. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 13:97-104. 
•	 Rørvik, L. M., M. Yndestad, and E. Skjerve. 
1991. Growth of Listeria monocytogenes in 
vacuum-packed, smoked salmon during storage 
at 4°C. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 14:111-118. 
•	 Rusul, G., and N. H. Yaacob. 1995. Prevalence 
of Bacillus cereus in selected foods and 
detection of enterotoxin using TECRA-VIA and 
BCET-RPLA. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 25:131-139. 
•	 Schiemann, D. A. 1988. Examination of 
enterotoxin production at low temperature 
by Yersinia enterocolitica in culture media 
and foods. J. Food Prot. 51:571-573. 
•	 Segner, W. P., C. F. Schmidt, and J. K. Boltz. 
1971. Minimal growth temperature, sodium 
chloride tolerance, pH sensitivity, and toxin 
production of marine and terrestrial strains 
of Clostridium botulinum type C. Appl. 
Microbiol. 22:1025-1029. 
•	 Shaw, M. K., A. G. Marr, and J. L. Ingraham. 
1971. Determination of the minimal 
temperature for growth of Escherichia coli. J. 
Bacteriol. 105:683-684. 
•	 Skinner, G. E., and J. W. Larkin. 1998. 
Conservative prediction of time to 
Clostridium botulinum toxin formation for 
use with time-temperature indicators to 
ensure the safety of foods. J. Food Protect. 
61:1154-1160. 
•	 Smith, G. R., and A. Turner. 1989. The 
production of Clostridium botulinum toxin 
in mammalian, avian, and piscine carrion. 
Epidemiol. Infect. 102:467-471. 
•	 Smith, M. G. 1985. The generation time, lag 
time, and minimum temperature of growth 
of coliform organisms on meat, and the 
implications for codes of practice in abattoirs. 
J. Hyg., Camb. 94:289-300. 
•	 Sneath, P. H. A. (ed.), 1986. Bergey’s manual 
of systematic bacteriology, vol. 2. Williams & 
Wilkins, Baltimore, MD. 
•	 Sokari, T. 1991. Distribution of 
enterotoxigenic Staphylococcus aureus in 
ready-to-eat foods in eastern Nigeria. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 12:275-279. 
•	 Stern, N. J., and A. W. Kotula. 1982. Survival 
of Campylobacter jejuni inoculated into 
ground beef. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
44(5):1150-1153. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
434 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 Subcommittee on Microbiological Criteria. 
1985. An evaluation of the role of 
microbiological criteria for foods and food 
ingredients. Committee on Food Protection, 
National Research Council. National Academy 
Press, Washington, DC. 256 p. 
•	 Sutherland, A. D. 1993. Toxin production by 
Bacillus cereus in dairy products. J. Dairy 
Res. 60:569-574. 
•	 Sutherland, J. P., and A. J. Bayliss. 1994. 
Predictive modeling of growth of Yersinia 
enterocolitica: the effects of temperature, pH, 
and sodium chloride. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
21:197-215. 
•	 Sutherland, J. P., A. Aherne, and A. L. 
Beaumont. 1996. Preparation and validation 
of a growth model for Bacillus cereus: the 
effects of temperature, pH, sodium chloride 
and carbon dioxide. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
30:359-372. 
•	 Sutherland, J. P., A. J. Bayliss, and D. S. 
Braxton. 1995. Predictive modeling of growth 
of Escherichia coli O157:H7: the effects of 
temperature, pH and sodium chloride. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 25:29-49. 
•	 Sutherland, J. P., A. J. Bayliss, and T. A. 
Roberts. 1994. Predictive modeling of growth 
of Staphylococcus aureus: the effects of 
temperature, pH and sodium chloride. Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 21:217-236. 
•	 Swartzentruber, A., A. H. Schwab, A. P. 
Duran, B. A. Wents, and R. B. Read, Jr. 1980. 
Microbiological quality of frozen shrimp 
and lobster tail in the retail market. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 40:765-769. 
•	 Syndicat National des Fabricants de Plats 
Prepares. 1995. Aide a la maitrise de 
l’hygiene alimentaire. Collection Alesial, 
Alesial Services, Paris, France. 
•	 Taormina, P. J., G. W. Bartholomew, and 
W. J. Dorsa. 2003. Incidence of Clostridium 
perfringens in commercially produced cured 
raw meat product mixtures and behavior 
in cooked products during chilling and 
refrigerated storage. J Food Prot. 66(1):72-81. 
•	 Tatani, S. R. 1973. Influence of food 
environments on growth of Staphylococcus 
aureus and production of various 
enterotoxins. J. Milk Food Technol. 36:559. 
•	 Telzak, E. E., E. P. Bell, D. A. Kautter, L. 
Crowell, L. D. Budnick, D. L. Morse, and 
S. Schultz. 1990. International outbreak of 
type E botulism due to uneviscerated fish. J. 
Infect. Dis. 161:340-342. 
•	 Thayer, D. W., W. S. Muller, R. L. Buchanan, 
and J. G. Phillips. 1987. Effect of NaCl, pH, 
temperature, and atmosphere on growth of 
Salmonella typhimurium in glucose-mineral 
salts medium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
53:1311-1315. 
•	 Thomas, L. V., J. W. T. Wimpenny, and A. C. 
Peters. 1991. An investigation of the effects 
of four variables in the growth of Salmonella 
typhimurium using two types of gradient gel 
plates. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 14:261-275. 
•	 Thomas, L. V., J. W. T. Wimpenny, and A. C. 
Peters. 1992. Testing multiple variables on the 
growth of a mixed inoculum of Salmonella 
strains using gradient plates. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 15:165-175. 
•	 Tilton, R. C., and R. W. Ryan. 1987. Clinical 
and ecological characteristics of Vibrio 
vulnificus in the northeastern United States. 
Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 6:109-117. 
•	 Tipparaju, S., S. Ravishankar, and P. J. 
Slade. February 2004. Survival of Listeria 
monocytogenes in vanilla-flavored soy and 
dairy products stored at 8 degrees C. J. Food 
Prot. 67(2):378-382. 
•	 Twedt, R. M., P. L. Spaulding, and H. E. Hall. 
1969. Vibrio parahaemolyticus. J. Bacteriol. 
98:511-518. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration and 
Food Safety and Inspection Service. 1992. 
Preventing foodborne listeriosis. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Food and 
Drug Administration, and U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection 
Service, Washington, DC. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
435 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration and 
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2003. 
Quantitative assessment of relative risk 
to public health from foodborne Listeria 
monocytogenes among selected categories 
of ready-to-eat foods. http://www.fda. 
gov/downloads/food/scienceresearch/ 
researchareas/riskassessmentsafetyassessment/ 
ucm197330.pdf. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
Foodborne pathogenic microorganisms and 
natural toxins handbook. In The bad bug 
book. http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodSafety/ 
FoodborneIllness/FoodborneIllnessFoodborne 
PathogensNaturalToxins/default.htm. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2007. 
National Shellfish Sanitation Program 
guide for the control of molluscan shellfish 
2007 Revision. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, 
Food and Drug Administration, Center 
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
FoodSafety/Product-SpecificInformation/ 
Seafood/FederalStatePrograms/ 
NationalShellfishSanitationProgram/ 
ucm046353.htm. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
2005. Quantitative risk assessment on the 
public health impact of pathogenic Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus in raw oysters. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. 
•	 Venkataramaiah, N., and A. G. Kempton. 
1975. Bacterial growth in seafood on 
restaurant premises. Can. J. Microbiol. 
21(11):1788-1797. 
•	 Walker, S. J., P. Archer, and J. G. Banks. 
1990. Growth of Listeria monocytogenes at 
refrigeration temperatures. J. Appl. Bacteriol. 
68:157-162. 
microflora in fresh cod fish treated with 
lysozyme and EDTA. Food Microbiol. 9:207­
213. 
•	 Ward, D. R. and C. R. Hackney (ed.). 1991. 
Microbiology of marine food products. Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY. 
•	 Watkins, W., and S. McCarthy (ed.). 1995. 
Proceedings of the 1994 Vibrio vulnificus 
Workshop, second printing. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. 
•	 Weagant, S. D., P. N. Sado, K. G. Colburn, 
J. D. Torkelson, F. A. Stanley, M. H. Krane, 
S. E. Shields, and C. F. Thayer. 1988. The 
incidence of Listeria species in frozen 
seafood products. J. Food Prot. 51:655-657. 
•	 Weber, J. T., R. G. Hibbs, Jr., A. Darwish, 
B. Mishu, A. L. Corwin, M. Rakha, C. L. 
Hatheway, S. el Sharkawy, S. A. el-Rahim, 
and M. F. al-Hamd, et al. 1993. A massive 
outbreak of type E botulism associated with 
traditional salted fish in Cairo. J. Infect. Dis. 
167:451-454. 
•	 Weichart, D., and J. D. Oliver. 1992. Low 
temperature induced non-culturability and 
killing of Vibrio vulnificus. FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett. 79:205-210. 
•	 West, P. A. 1989. The human pathogenic 
vibrios - a public health update with 
environmental perspectives. Epidemiol. 
Infect. 103:1-34. 
•	 Whiting, R. C., and K. A. Naftulin. 1992. 
Effect of headspace oxygen concentration on 
growth and toxin production by proteolytic 
strains of Clostridium botulinum. J. Food 
Prot. 55:23-17. 
•	 Wright, A. C., R. T. Hill, J. A. Johnson, M. C. 
Roghman, R. R. Colwell, and J. G. Morris, Jr. 
1996. Distribution of Vibrio vulnificus in the 
Chesapeake Bay. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
62:717-724. •	 Wang, C., and L. A. Shelef. 1992. Behavior 
of Listeria monocytogenes and the spoilage 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
436 
 
 
 
  
 
•	 Yang, S. E., and C. C. Chou. July 2000. 
Growth and survival of Escherichia coli 
O157:H7 and Listeria monocytogenes in egg 
products held at different temperatures. J. 
Food Prot. 63(7):907-911. 
•	 Zaika, L. L., A. H. Kim, and L. Ford, 1991. 
Effect of sodium nitrite on growth of Shigella 
flexneri. J. Food Prot. 54:424-428. 
•	 Zaika, L. L., E. Moulden, L. Weimer, J. G. 
Phillips, and R. L. Buchanan. 1994. Model 
for the combined effects of temperature, 
initial pH, sodium chloride and sodium 
nitrite concentrations on anaerobic growth 
of Shigella flexneri. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
23:345-358. 
•	 Zaika, L. L., J. G. Phillips, and R. L. 
Buchanan. 1992. Model for aerobic growth 
of Shigella flexneri under various conditions 
of temperature, pH, sodium chloride and 
sodium nitrite concentrations. J. Food Prot. 
55:509-513. 
•	 Zaika, L. L., J. G. Phillips, J. S. Fanelli, 
and O. J. Scullen. 1998. Revised model for 
aerobic growth of Shigella flexneri to extend 
the validity of predictions at temperatures 
between 10 and 19°C. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
41:9-19.. 
•	 Zwietering, M. H., I. Jongenburger, F. M. 
Rombouts, and K. van’t Riet. 1990. Modeling 
of the bacterial growth curve. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 56:1875-1881. 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
437 
NOTES:
 
APPENDIX 4: Bacterial Pathogen Growth and Inactivation 
438
 
APPENDIX 5 : FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN  REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not 
operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to 
discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number 
listed on the title page of this guidance.
This appendix lists FDA and EPA levels relating to safety attributes of fish and fishery products. In many cases, these levels represent the point 
at which the agency could take legal action to include removing product from market. Consequently, the levels contained in this table may not 
always be suitable for critical limits. 
Regardless of an established level or not, FDA may take legal action against food deemed to be adulterated as defined by the Federal Food, Drug 
and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) [21 U.S.C. 342].  A food is adulterated if the food bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance which 
may render it injurious to health under section 402 (a)(1) of the FD&C Act. Additionally, a food is adulterated if the food has been prepared, 
packed or held under insanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered 
injurious to health under section 402 (a)(4) of the FD&C Act.
A5 - 1 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
ANIMAL DRUGS
Products. Levels. References.
All fish 10. Drugs prohibited for extra-label use in animals: 
•	 No residue permitted for the following: 
o Chloramphenicol;
o Clenbuterol;
o Diethylstilbestrol (DES);
o Dimetridazole, Ipronidazole, and other 
Nitroimidazoles;
o Furazolidone, Nitrofurazone, and other 
nitrofurans;
o Fluoroquinilones;
o Glycopeptides.
21 CFR 530.41.
Finfish and lobster. Sum of tetracycline residues, including oxytetracycline, 
chlortetracycline, and tetracycline
 
1:
•	 ≥ 2.0 ppm (muscle tissue).
21 CFR 556.500.  
Salmonids. Azamethiphos 
9:
•	 ≥ 0.02 ppm (muscle/adhering skin).
Import Tolerance (https://www.fda.gov/
animalveterinary/products/importexports/
ucm315830.htm). 
Atlantic salmon and Rainbow trout. Benzocaine
 
9:
•	 ≥ 0.05 ppm (muscle with adhering skin).
Import Tolerance (https://www.fda.gov/
animalveterinary/products/importexports/
ucm315830.htm). 
Salmonids and Walleye. Chloramine-T
 1 (para-toluenesulfonamide-marker residue):
•	 ≥ 0.90 ppm (muscle/skin).
21 CFR 556.118.    
A5 - 2 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
Freshwater-reared finfish (other than catfish) 
and salmonids, and catfish.
Florfenicol (florfenicol amine-the marker residue):
•	 Freshwater-reared finfish (other than catfish) and 
salmonids ≥ 1.0 ppm (muscle/skin);
•	 Catfish ≥ 1.0 ppm (muscle). 
21 CFR 556.283.  
Salmonids. Lufenuron
 
9:
•	 ≥ 1.35 ppm (muscle/adhering skin).
Import Tolerance  (https://www.fda.gov/
animalveterinary/products/importexports/
ucm315830.htm). 
Salmonids and catfish. Sulfadimethoxine/ormetoprim combination
 
1:
•	 ≥ 0.1 ppm for each drug (edible tissue).
21 CFR 556.640.
Trout. Sulfamerazine 
1:
•	 No residue permitted.
21 CFR 556.660.
Atlantic salmon. Telflubenzuron 
9:
•	 ≥ 0.5 ppm (muscle/adhering skin).
Import Tolerance  (https://www.fda.gov/
animalveterinary/products/importexports/
ucm315830.htm). 
BIOLOGICAL
Products. Levels. References.
All fish 
10. Clostridium botulinum:
•	 Presence of viable spores or vegetative cells in 
products that will support their growth; 
OR
•	 Presence of toxin
 
12.
International Commission on Microbiology 
Specifications for Food (ICMSF). 1996. 
Microorganisms in Food 5. Microbiological 
specification of food pathogens. London: 
Blackie Academic and Professional.
All fish
 
10 that is Ready-to-eat (RTE) as 
defined in 21 CFR 117.3 (including raw and 
cooked).
Listeria monocytogenes:  
•	 Presence of organism
 
12.
Shank F.R., E. L. Elliot, I. K. Wachsmuth, and 
M. E. Losikoff. 1996. US position on Listeria 
monocytogenes in foods. Food Control. 7: 229-
234.
A5 - 3 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
All fish 
10. Salmonella spp.:
•	 Presence of organism 
12.
Sec. 555.300 Compliance Policy Guide.
All fish 
10. Staphylococcus aureus:
•	 Positive for staphylococcal enterotoxin; 
OR 
•	 ≥ 10 
4
 /g (MPN);
OR
•	 Levels indicative of insanitary conditions 
12.
Compliance Program 7303.842.
All fish 
10 that has been previously cooked. Vibrio spp.:
•	 Presence of organism 
12.
International Commission on Microbiology 
Specifications for Food (ICMSF. 1996. 
Microorganisms in Food 5. Microbiological 
specification of food pathogens. London: 
Blackie Academic and Professional.
Raw bivalve shellfish
 
11. Vibrio cholerae:
•	 Presence of toxigenic organism.
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish. 
Raw fish 
10 other than raw bivalve shellfish 
that is ready-to-eat (RTE) as defined in 21 
CR 117.3.
Vibrio cholerae:
•	 Presence of organism 
12.
International Commission on Microbiology 
Specifications for Food (ICMSF. 1996. 
Microorganisms in Food 5. Microbiological 
specification of food pathogens. London: 
Blackie Academic and Professional. 
Post-harvest processed clams, mussels, 
oysters, and whole and roe-on scallops, 
fresh or frozen, that make a label claim of 
“processed to reduce Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
to non-detectable levels.” 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus: 
•	 ≥ 30 MPN/g.
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
Raw bivalve shellfish
 
11. Vibrio parahaemolyticus: 
•	 ≥ 1 x 10 
4
 /g.
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
A5 - 4 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
Post-harvest processed clams, mussels, 
oysters, and whole and roe-on scallops, 
fresh or frozen, that make a label claim of 
“processed to reduce Vibrio vulnificus to non-
detectable levels.”
Vibrio vulnificus:
•	 ≥ 30 MPN/g.
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
CHEMICAL
Products. Levels. References.
Fish and shellfish 
13. 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) 
1:
•	 Fish > 0.1 ppm;
•	 Shellfish > 1.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.142.
All fish 
10. Aldrin and dieldrin:
•	 ≥ 0.3 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
Frog legs. Benzene Hexachloride (BHC):
•	 ≥ 0.3 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
Fish freshwater 
13. Bispyribac-sodium 
1:
•	 > 0.01 ppm.
40 CFR 180.577. 
Oysters 
13. Carbaryl 
1:
•	 > 0.25 ppm.
40 CFR 180.169.
Fish and shellfish 
13. Carfentrazone-ethyl 
1:
•	 > 0.3 ppm.
40 CFR 180.515.    
All fish 
10. Chlordane:
•	 ≥ 0.3 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
A5 - 5 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
All fish 
10. Chlordecone:
•	 Crabmeat ≥ 0.4 ppm; 
•	 Other fish ≥ 0.3 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
All fish 
10. DDT, TDE, and DDE:
•	 ≥ 5.0 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
Fish and shellfish 
13. Diquat 
1:
•	 Fish > 2.0 ppm;
•	 Shellfish > 20.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.226.
Fish – freshwater finfish, farm raised 
13. Diuron and its metabolites 
1:
•	 > 2.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.106.
Fish 
13. Endothall and its monomethyl ester 
1:
•	 > 0.1 ppm.
40 CFR 180.293.
All fish 
10. Ethoxyquin:
•	 > 0.5 ppm (edible muscle).
21 CFR 172.140.
Fish, freshwater 
13. Flumioxazin 
1:
•	 > 1.5 ppm.
40 CFR 180.568.     
Crayfish, and Fish 
13. Fluridone 1:
•	 > 0.5 ppm.
40 CFR 180.420.
Fish – freshwater finfish and 
Fish – shellfish, crustacean 
13.
Fluxapyroxad 
1 (fungicide):
•	 > 0.01 ppm.
40 CFR 180.666.
A5 - 6 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
Fish – freshwater finfish,
Fish – shellfish, crustacean, and
Fish – shellfish, mollusc
 
13.
Florpyrauxifen-benzyl 
1:
•	 Freshwater Finfish > 2.0 ppm;
•	 Shellfish, crustacean > 0.5 ppm;
•	 Shellfish, mollusc > 20.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.695.
Fish, and shellfish 
13. Glyphosate 
1: 
•	 Fish > 0.25 ppm;
•	 Shellfish > 3.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.364.
All fish 
10. Heptachlor and heptachlor epoxide:
•	 ≥ 0.3 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
Scombrotoxin-forming fish, e.g., Tuna, mahi-
mahi, and related fish.
Histamine: 
•	 ≥ 500 ppm - toxic; 
•	 ≥ 50 ppm - decomposed.
Sec. 540.525 Compliance Policy Guide.
Fish and shellfish 
13. Imazapyr 
1:
•	 Fish > 1.0 ppm;
•	 Shellfish > 0.1 ppm.
40 CFR 180.500. 
All fish 
10. Methylmercury 
2:
•	 ≥ 1.0 ppm. 
Sec. 540.600 Compliance Policy Guide.
All fish 
10. Mirex:
•	 ≥ 0.1 ppm (edible portion).
Sec. 575.100 Compliance Policy Guide.
A5 - 7 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References.
Fish,
Fish – shellfish, crustacean, and 
Fish – shellfish, mollusc
 
13.
Penoxsulam 
1:
•	 Fish > 0.01 ppm;
•	 Shellfish, crustacean > 0.01 ppm;
•	 Shellfish, mollusc > 0.02 ppm.
40 CFR 180.605.  
All fish 
10. Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
1 (PCBs):
•	 ≥ 2.0 ppm (edible portion).
21 CFR 109.30.
Fish – freshwater finfish, and 
Fish – Shellfish, crustacean 
13. 
Saflufenacil 
1:
•	 > 0.01 ppm.
40 CFR 180.649.
Fish, 
Fish – Shellfish, crustacean, and 
Fish – shellfish, mollusc
 
13.
Spinosad 
1:
•	 > 4.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.495. 
Fish 
13. Triclopyr and its metabolites and degradates 
1:
•	 > 3.0 ppm.
40 CFR 180.417.    
Fish – freshwater finfish,
Fish – saltwater finfish, 
Fish – shellfish, crustacean, and 
Fish – shellfish mollusc
 
13. 
Topramezone 
1:
•	 > 0.05 ppm.
40 CFR 180.612.
A5 - 8 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
NATURAL TOXINS. 
7, 8
Products. Levels. References. 
Bivalve shellfish 
11. Azaspiracid 
3, 6 (Azaspiracid Shellfish Poisoning (AZP)):
•	 ≥ 0.16 mg/kg azaspiracid-1 equivalents (i.e., 
combined azaspiracid-1, -2, and -3).
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
Clams, mussels, oysters, and whole and roe-
on scallops, fresh, frozen, or canned
 
11.
Brevetoxin 
5, 6 (Neurotoxic Shellfish Poisoning (NSP)):
•	 ≥ 0.8 mg/kg (20 mouse units/100 g) brevetoxin-2 
equivalent or 5,000 cells/L. 
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
Finfish (primarily reef fish). Ciguatoxin
 
4 (Ciguatera Fish Poisoning (CFP)):
•	 Caribbean ciguatoxins: ≥ 0.1 µg/kg Caribbean 
ciguatoxin-1 (C-CTX-1) equivalents;
•	 Indian ciguatoxins: Guidance levels have yet to be 
established;
•	 Pacific ciguatoxins: ≥ 0.01 µg/kg Pacific 
ciguatoxin-1 (P-CTX-1) equivalents.
Dickey, R.W. and S.M. Plakas. 2010. Ciguatera: 
A public health perspective. Toxicon 56(2): 
123-136. 
Dickey, R. W. 2008. Ciguatera toxins: 
chemistry, toxicology, and detection, p. 
479−500. In L. M. Botana (ed.), Seafood and 
freshwater toxins: pharmacology, physiology, 
and detection, 2nd ed. CRC Press/Taylor & 
Francis. 
All fish
 
10. Domoic acid 
6 (Amnesic Shellfish Poisoning (ASP)):
•	 ≥ 20 mg/kg domoic acid (except Dungeness crab 
viscera);
•	 > 30 mg/kg domoic acid (Dungeness crab viscera 
ONLY). 
Compliance Program 7303.842.
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
FDA Memorandum, Director, Office of Seafood. 
Marine Biotoxins in Dungeness Crab. January 
14, 1993.
Clams, mussels, oysters, and whole and roe-
on scallops, fresh, frozen, or canned
 
11.
Okadaic acid 
3 (Diarrhetic Shellfish Poisoning (DSP)):
•	 ≥ 0.16 mg/kg total okadaic acid equivalents (i.e., 
combined free okadaic acid, dinophysistoxins-1 and 
-2, and their acyl-esters).
National Shellfish Sanitation Program Guide for 
the Control of Molluscan Shellfish.
A5 - 9 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
Products. Levels. References. 
All fish 
10. Saxitoxin 
3, 6 (Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning (PSP)): 
•	 ≥ 0.8 mg/kg saxitoxin equivalent (80 µg/100 g).
Sec. 540.250 Compliance Policy Guide.
Compliance Program 7303.842.
PHYSICAL
Products. Levels. References.
All fish 
10. Hard or sharp foreign object:
•	 Generally 0.3 (7 mm) – 1.0 (25 mm) in length.
Sec. 555.425 Compliance Policy Guide.
ACRONYMS: MPN = Most probable number;  CTX = ciguatoxin.
FOOTNOTES: 
1. These values are tolerances.  (Reference: 21CFR 109, 21CFR 556 and 40 CFR 180).
2. Refer to Chapter 10 – Methylmercury for additional information.
3. AZP, DSP, and PSP equivalents are based on chemical abundance as determined by instrumental analysis. In some cases (i.e. AZP, DSP, and PSP), 
toxicity equivalent factors (TEFs) may be available and should be considered in determining total toxin equivalents.
4. CFP equivalents are based on in vitro (cell culture bioassay) toxicity.
5. NSP equivalents are based on in vivo (mouse bioassay toxicity).
6. Refer to the National Shellfish Sanitation Program: Guide for Control of Molluscan Shellfish for details on approved methodologies for Biotoxin analysis 
of molluscan shellfish. (https://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/FederalStateFoodPrograms/ucm2006754.htm).
7. Refer to Chapter 6 – Natural Toxins for additional information.
8. Guidance levels used to confirm illnesses (i.e., CFP), inform advisories for at risk harvest areas (i.e., CFP) and/or make a determination for harvest 
area closures (i.e., ASP, AZP, DSP, NSP, and PSP.) Guidance levels are not intended to be identified in the HACCP plan as a control measure.
9. These values are import tolerances (Reference: https://www.fda.gov/animalveterinary/products/importexports/ucm315830.htm).
A5 - 10 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
TABLE A-5
FDA AND EPA SAFETY LEVELS IN REGULATIONS AND GUIDANCE
10. The term “fish” and “fishery products” are defined in the Fish and Fishery Products Regulation (21 CFR 123.3(d) and 123.3(e)) as follows:
•	 Fish – Fresh or saltwater finfish, crustaceans, other forms of aquatic animal life (including, but not limited to, alligator, frog, aquatic turtle, 
jellyfish, sea cucumber, and sea urchin and the roe of such animals) other than birds or mammals, and all mollusks, where such animal life is 
intended for human consumption 
•	 Fishery products – any human food product in which fish is a characterizing ingredient.
11. The term “shellfish” is defined in the NSSP as all species of:
a. Oysters, clams, or mussels, whether: 
i. Shucked or in the shell;
ii. Raw, including post-harvest processed; 
iii. Frozen or unfrozen;
iv. Whole or in part; and
b. Scallops in any form, except when the final product form is the adductor muscle only.
12. Detectable by methods equivalent to FDA’s Bacteriological Analytical Manual. 
13. Products and “fish” are defined through EPA’s References. Refer to the EPA for explanation. 
A5 - 11 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
NOTES:
A5 - 12 (March 2020)
Appendix 5: FDA and EPA Safety Levels in Regulations and Guidance  
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
•	 Table A-1 contains a list of Japanese 
vernacular names and their corresponding 
U.S. market names;  
•	 Table A-2 contains a list of Hawaiian 
vernacular names and their corresponding 
U.S. market names.  
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
443 
 These tables are not intended to be a complete list of species consumed raw. 
TABLE A-1 
COMMONLY USED JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAMES 
WHEN THE JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
AINAME GREENLING 
AJI MACKEREL, JACK 
AKA-GAI CLAM, ARKSHELL 
AKAMANBO OPAH 
AKAUO MONKFISH 
AKODAI MONKFISH 
AKOU-DAI ROCKFISH, RED 
AMADAI TILEFISH 
AMAEBI PRAWN, SWEET 
ANAGO, HAMO CONGER EEL 
ANKOU MONKFISH 
AOYAGI CLAM, SURF 
ASARI CLAM, SHORT NECKED 
AWABI ABALONE 
AYU SMELT 
BAIGAI WHELK 
BORA MULLET, GRAY 
BURL YELLOWTAIL 
DOJYOU LOACH 
EBI SHRIMP, FRESHWATER 
EBI SHRIMP, PINK 
EBODAI BUTTERFISH 
ESO LIZARDFISH 
EZOBORA WHELK 
FUEFUKIDAI EMPEROR 
FUGU PUFFER 
FUGU GLOBEFISH 
FUNA CARP 
GARIGANI CRAYFISH 
GIN-SAKE SALMON, COHO 
HAKKAKU SCULPIN 
HAMACHI YELLOWTAIL 
HAMAGURI CLAM 
HANASAKI KANI CRAB, HANASAKI 
HATA GROUPER 
HAYA DACE 
HAZE GOBY 
HIGEDARA LINGCOD 
HIRAAJI JACK 
HIRAME FLUKE, FLOUNDER 
HIUCHIDAI ORANGE ROUGHY 
HOSHI-GAREI FLOUNDER 
HOTARUIKA SQUID 
HOTATE-GAI SCALLOP, GIANT 
HOUBOU SEA ROBIN 
HOYA SEA SQUIRT 
IBODAI BUTTERFISH 
IIDAKO OCTOPUS 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
444 
TABLE A-1 
COMMONLY USED JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAMES 
WHEN THE JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
IKA SQUID 
IKANAGO SAND EEL 
IKURA SALMON, ROE 
INADA YELLOWTAIL 
ISAKI GRUNT 
ISAKI GRUNT OR SWEETLIPS 
ISEEBI LOBSTER 
ISEEBI LOBSTER, NORWAY 
ISEEBI LOBSTER, SLIPPER 
ISHIDAI, ISHIGAKIDAI KNIFEJAW 
ISHIMOCHI GUCHI CROAKER 
ITOYORIDAI THREADFIN BREAM 
IWANA CHAR 
IWASHI SARDINE 
JNADA YELLOWTAIL 
KAJ I KA SCULPIN 
KAMASU BARRACUDA 
KAMASUSAWARA WAHOO 
KANI CRAB, BROWN 
KANI CRAB, DEEP SEA 
KANI CRAB, KING 
KANI CRAB, SNOW 
KAREI FLOUNDER 
KASAGO ROCKFISH 
KATSUO BONITO 
KATSUO SMALL TUNA 
KAWAHAGI TRIGGERFISH 
KAWAHGI FILEFISH 
KEGANI (KANI) CRAB, KEGANI 
KIJIHATA GROUPER 
KINK THORNEYHEAD 
KINME ALFONSINO 
KINMEDAI ALFONSINO 
KINTOKIDAI BIGEYE 
KISU JAPANESE WHITING 
KOBUDAI, BUDAI PARROTFISH 
KOCHI FLATFISH 
KOHADA GIZZARD SHAD 
KOHADA SHAD 
KOI CARP 
KOIKA CUTTLEFISH 
KONOSHIRO GIZZARD SHAD 
KOSHODAI GRUNT OR SWEETLIPS 
KURAGE JELLYFISH 
KURODAI PORGY 
KURUMA-EBI SHRIMP, TIGER PRAWN 
KYABIA CAVIAR 
KYURINO SMELT 
MA-DAKO TAKO OCTOPUS 
MA-IKA CUTTLEFISH 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
445 
 
TABLE A-1 
COMMONLY USED JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAMES 
WHEN THE JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
MADAI SEA BREAM 
MAGURO TUNA 
MAIWASHI SARDINE 
MAKOGAREI FLOUNDER 
MANAGA TSUO, ECHIOPIA POMFRET 
MANBOH SUNFISH, OCEAN 
MANDAI OPAH 
MEBARU ROCKFISH 
MEDAL BLUENOSE 
MEKAJIKI SWORDFISH 
MIRU-GAI CLAM, GEODUCK 
MIZUDAKO OCTOPUS 
MIZUIK SQUID 
MONGOIKA CUTTLEFISH 
MONGORAKAWAHAGI TRIGGERFISH 
NAMAKO SEA CUCUMBER 
NIBE CROAKER 
NIJI-MASU TROUT, RAINBOW 
NISHIN HERRING 
O’HYOU HALIBUT 
ODORI SHRIMP, TIGER PRAWN 
OKAMASU BARRACUDA 
OKAMSU BARRACUDA 
ONAGADAI SNAPPER 
SABA MACKEREL 
SAIRA SAURY 
SAKANA FISH 
SAKE SALMON, CHUM 
SAME SHARK 
SAMMA SAURY 
SANMA SAURY 
SAWAGANI RIVER CRAB 
SAYORI, SAVORI HALFBEAK 
SAZAE TOP SHELL 
SAZAE TURBOT, SHELL 
SHINKO SHAD 
SHIIRA MAHI-MAHI 
SHIMAAJI JACK 
SHISHAMO CAPELIN AND ROE 
SHITA-BIRAME SOLE 
SHIZU BUTTERFISH 
SUJI-KO SALMON, ROE 
SUKESODORA POLLOCK AND ROE 
SUMIIKA CUTTLEFISH 
SURUMEIKA SQUID 
SUZUKI SEA BASS 
SWARA MACKEREL, SPANISH 
TACHIUO CUTTLEFISH 
TAI SEA BREAM, RED SNAPPER 
TAKO OCTOPUS 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
446 
TABLE A-1 
COMMONLY USED JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAMES 
WHEN THE JAPANESE VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
TARA COD AND ROE/MILT 
TARUMI FEUDA SNAPPER 
TARUMI FEUDAI SNAPPER 
TENEGADAKO OCTOPUS 
TOBIUO FLYING FISH 
TORIGAI COCKLE 
TORO TUNA 
TSUBUGAI WHELK 
UMAZURAHAGI TRIGGERFISH 
UNAGI EEL 
UNI SEA URCHIN ROE 
WAKASAGI SMELT 
WARASA YELLOWTAIL 
YAMAME SALMON, CHERRY 
YARIIKA SQUID 
Y ANAGI-GAREI FLOUNDER 
ZUWAI-GANI CRAB, SNOW 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
447 
TABLE A-2 
COMMONLY USED HAWAIIAN VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAME 
WHEN THE HAWAIIAN VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
A'AWA HOGFISH 
A'U BLUE MARLIN 
A'U BLACK MARLIN, SILVER MARLIN 
A'U LEPE SAILFISH 
A'UKU SWORDFISH 
AHA NEEDLEFISH 
AHI YELLOWFIN TUNA 
AHI PALAHA ALBACORE 
AHOLEHOLE AHOLHOLE 
AKU SKIPJACK TUNA 
AKULE BIGEYE SCAD 
ALA'IHI SQUIRRELFISH 
AMA'AMA MULLET 
API SAILFIN TANG 
AUWEKE, MOANA KALI GOLDSADDLE GOATFISH 
AWA MILKFISH 
AWEOWEO BIGEYE TUNA 
DEEPSEA MOI BEARDFISH 
EHU SQUIRRELFISH SNAPPER 
HAHALALU BIGEYE SCAD 
HAPU'UPU'U SEALE’S GROUPER 
HE'E MAULI OCTOPUS 
HEBE SHORTNOSE SPEARFISH 
HILU BLACK STRIPED WRASSE 
IHEIHE HALFBEAK 
KAHALA AMBERJACK 
KAKU BARRACUDA 
KALA UNICORNFISH 
KALEKALE VON SIEBOLD’S SNAPPER 
KAMANU RAINBOW RUNNER 
KAWAKAWA KAWAKAWA 
KAWELE'A JAPANESE BARRACUDA 
KOLE YELLOW-EYED SURGEON 
KUMU WHITE SADDLE GOATFISH 
KUPIPI GRAY DAMSELFISH 
LAI LEATHERBACK 
LAINIHI RAZOR WRASSE 
MAHIMAHI DOLPHIN FISH 
MAHIMAHI SMALL DOLPHIN FISH 
MAI'I'I BLACK AND BROWN SURGEON 
MAILKO BLUELINED SURGEON 
MAKIAWA SARDINE 
MAKUA OCEAN SUNFISH 
MALOLO FLYING FISH 
MAMO SERGEANT MAJOR DAMSEL 
MANINI CONVICT TANG 
MOANA MANYBAR GOATFISH 
MOI THREADFIN 
MU PORGY 
NA'ENA'A ORANGE SPOT WRASSE 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
448 
TABLE A-2 
COMMONLY USED HAWAIIAN VERNACULAR NAMES FOR FISH EATEN RAW WITH 
CORRESPONDING U.S. MARKET NAME 
WHEN THE HAWAIIAN VERNACULAR NAME IS … THE U.S. MARKET NAME IS … 
NENUE RUDDERFISH 
NUNU TRUMPETFISH 
O'OPU KAI NOHU LARGE-HEADED SCORPION 
OILIPA BLUELINED LEATHER JACKET 
OIO BONEFISH 
ONO WAHOO 
OPAH MOONFISH 
OPAKAPAKA PINK SNAPPER 
OPELU MACKEREL SCAD 
PAKI'I FLOUNDER 
PAKU'IKU'I ACHILLES TANG 
PALANI DUSSUMIER’S SURGEON 
PANUUNUHU GAIMARD’S PARROTFISH 
PAPAIKUALOA KONA CRAB 
PO'ONUI BIGEYE TUNA 
PO'OPA'A HAWKFISH 
PO'OU ROSE-COLORED WRASSE 
POMFRET POMFRET 
PUALU ELONGATE SURGEONFISH 
PUHIUHA WHITE EEL 
ROI ARGUS GROUPER 
SAMOAN CRAB MANGROVE 
SQUID PURPLEBACK FLYING SQUID 
STRIPED MARLIN STRIPED MARLIN 
TA'APE BLUE-STRIPED SNAPPER 
TO'AU BLACK TAIL SNAPPER 
U'U SQUIRRELFISH 
UHU PARROTFISH 
UKIUKI BRIGHAM’S SNAPPER 
UKU GRAY JOBFISH, SNAPPER 
ULA SPINY LOBSTER 
ULAPAPA SLIPPER LOBSTER 
ULUA THICK-LIPPED TREVALLY 
ULUA KIHIKIHI THREADFIN JACK 
UOAUOA MULLET 
UPAPALU CARDINAL FISH 
WALU OILFISH 
WHITE WEKE WHITE/SAMOAN GOATFISH 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
449 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Organiz
ation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development. 1995. Multilingual dictionary 
of fish and fish products. Fishing News Book. 
University Press, Cambridge. 
•	 U.S. Food a
nd Drug Administration. 2009. 
The seafood list. Department of Health and 
Human Services, Public Health Service, 
Food and Drug Administration, Center 
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
College Park, MD. http://www.fda.gov/Food/ 
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/ 
GuidanceDocuments/Seafood/ucm113260. 
•	 Tinker, S
. W. 1991. Fishes of Hawaii. 
Hawaiian Service, Inc., Honolulu HI. 
APPENDIX 6: Japanese and Hawaiian Vernacular Names for Fish Eaten Raw 
450 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood 
Processing - Public Health Impacts 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic.  It does not 
create or confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public.  You can use an 
alternative approach if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations.  If you want 
to discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance.  If you cannot 
identify the appropriate FDA staff, call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance. 
Bacillus cereus (B. cereus) is the bacterium 
responsible for B. cereus food poisoning.  An 
estimated 27,400 foodborne cases of B. cereus 
food poisoning occur annually in the United 
States.  There are two forms of the intoxication: 
one causes diarrhea, starting from 6 to 15 hours 
after consumption, and the other causes vomiting 
and nausea, starting from 30 minutes to 6 hours 
after consumption.  Symptoms in both forms last 
about 24 hours.  Everyone is susceptible to B. 
cereus food poisoning 
Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) is the bacterium 
responsible for campylobacteriosis.  An estimated 
1,960,000 foodborne cases of campylobacteriosis 
occur annually in the United States.  Symptoms 
include:  diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain, nausea, 
headache, and muscle pain.  Symptoms start from 
2 to 5 days after consumption and last from 7 to 
10 days.  Everyone is susceptible to infection by 
C. jejuni. 
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum) toxin is the 
toxin responsible for botulism.  An estimated 58 
foodborne cases of botulism occur annually in 
the United States.  Symptoms include:  weakness; 
vertigo; double vision; difficulty in speaking, 
swallowing, and breathing; abdominal swelling; 
constipation; paralysis; and death.  Symptoms start 
from 18 to 36 hours after consumption.  Everyone 
is susceptible to intoxication by C. botulinum 
toxin; only a few micrograms of the toxin can 
cause illness.  Mortality is high; without the 
antitoxin and respiratory support, death is likely. 
Clostridium perfringens (C. perfringens) is the 
bacterium responsible for perfringens food 
poisoning.  An estimated 249,000 foodborne cases 
of perfringens food poisoning occur annually in 
the United States.  Symptoms include: abdominal 
cramps and diarrhea.  Symptoms start from 8 
hours to 1 day after consumption and last for 
about a day. 
Everyone is susceptible to perfringens food 
poisoning, but it is more common in the young 
and elderly. 
While most Escherichia coli (E. coli) are non­
pathogenic, certain strains of the bacterium are 
responsible for four types of illness:  gastroenteritis 
or infantile diarrhea, caused by enteropathogenic 
E. coli (EPEC); travelers’ diarrhea, caused by 
enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC); bacillary dysentery, 
caused by enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC); and 
hemorrhagic colitis, caused by enterohemorrhagic 
E. coli (EHEC).  EHEC is the most severe, with 
potential for serious consequences, such as 
hemolytic uremic syndrome, particularly in young 
children.  An estimated 173,000 foodborne cases 
from all four types of E. coli occur annually in the 
United States.  Symptoms vary for the different 
forms of illness, but include:  abdominal pain, 
diarrhea, vomiting, fever, chills, dehydration, 
electrolyte imbalance, high body fluid acidity, and 
general discomfort.  Symptoms start from 8 hours 
to 9 days after consumption and last from 6 hours 
to 19 days, with both periods varying significantly 
between the illness types.  Everyone is susceptible 
to all forms of infection from E. coli, but EPEC is 
most commonly associated with infants, and all 
types tend to result in more severe symptoms in 
the very young and elderly. 
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood Processing - Public Health Impacts 
451 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Hepatitis A virus is responsible for foodborne 
hepatitis.  An estimated 4,200 foodborne cases 
of hepatitis A occur annually in the United 
States.  Symptoms include:  fever, malaise, 
nausea, anorexia, abdominal discomfort, and 
jaundice.  Symptoms start from 10 to 50 days 
after consumption and last 1 to 2 weeks.  Unless 
previously infected or immunized, everyone is 
susceptible to infection by hepatitis A virus. 
Listeria monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes) 
is the bacterium responsible for listeriosis. 
An estimated 2,500 foodborne cases of 
listeriosis occur annually in the United 
States. L. monocytogenes can produce 
mild flu-like symptoms in all individuals. 
However, in susceptible individuals, including 
pregnant women, newborns, and the 
immunocompromised, it can result in more 
severe symptoms, which include:  septicemia, 
meningitis, encephalitis, spontaneous abortion, 
and stillbirth.  Symptoms start from 
3 days to 3 weeks after consumption.  Mortality 
is high in those that display the more severe 
symptoms. 
Norovirus (also known as Norwalk-like virus) 
is a major cause of viral gastroenteritis.  An 
estimated 9,200,000 foodborne cases of norovirus 
occur annually in the United States.  Symptoms 
include: diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
cramps, headache, body ache, and low-grade 
fever.  Symptoms start from 2 to 4 days after 
consumption and generally last 2½ days. 
Everyone is susceptible to infection by norovirus. 
Salmonella spp. is the bacterium responsible for 
salmonellosis.  An estimated 1,340,000 cases 
of foodborne salmonellosis occur annually in 
the United States.  Symptoms include:  nausea, 
vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, fever, 
and headache.  Symptoms start from 6 hours 
to 2 days after consumption and generally last 
from 1 to 2 days.  The most severe form, typhoid 
fever, is caused by Salmonella typhi.  Everyone 
is susceptible to infection by Salmonella spp., but 
symptoms are most severe in the elderly, infants, 
and the infirmed.  Infections by Salmonella spp. 
and other closely related bacterial pathogens, such 
as Shigella spp., E. coli, and Yersinia enterocolitica 
infections can lead to chronic reactive arthritic 
symptoms in pre-disposed individuals. 
Shigella spp. is the bacterium responsible for 
shigellosis.  An estimated 89,600 foodborne cases 
of shigellosis occur annually in the United States. 
Symptoms include:  abdominal pain; cramps; 
diarrhea; fever; vomiting; blood, pus, or mucus 
in stools; continuous or frequent urges for bowel 
movement; and death.  Symptoms start from 
12 hours to 2 days after consumption and last 
from 1 to 2 weeks.  Everyone is susceptible to 
infection by Shigella spp. 
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is the 
bacterium responsible for staphylococcal food 
poisoning.  An estimated 185,000 foodborne 
cases of staphylococcal food poisoning occur 
annually in the United States.  Symptoms 
include:  vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
nausea, and weakness.  Symptoms usually 
start within 4 hours of consumption.  Everyone 
is susceptible to intoxication by S. aureus 
toxin, with more severe symptoms, including 
occasional death, occurring in infants, the 
elderly, and debilitated persons.  
Vibrio cholerae (V. cholerae) O1 and O139 are 
the bacteria responsible for Asiatic or epidemic 
cholera.  No major outbreaks of this disease 
have occurred in the United States since 1911, 
but an estimated 49 sporadic foodborne cases 
occur annually (including V. cholerae non-O1 and 
non-O139).  Symptoms include:  mild-to-severe 
diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, 
dehydration, shock, and death.  Symptoms 
start from 6 hours to 5 days after consumption. 
Everyone is susceptible to infection by V. cholerae 
O1 and O139, but those with weakened immunity, 
reduced stomach acidity, or malnutrition may 
suffer more severe forms of the illness. 
V. cholerae non-O1 and non-O139 are bacteria 
that are also responsible for vibriosis.  V. 
cholerae non-O1 and non-O139 may also cause 
gastroenteritis and, rarely, septicemia.  The 
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood Processing - Public Health Impacts 
452 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
symptoms of gastroenteritis include:  diarrhea, 
abdominal cramps, fever, vomiting, and 
nausea.  Symptoms start from 6 hours to 3 days 
after consumption and last from 6 to 7 days.  
Everyone is susceptible to gastroenteritis from V.
 
cholerae non-O1 and non-O139, but septicemia 
usually develops only in those with underlying 
chronic disease.
 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus (V. parahaemolyticus) is
 
another bacterium that is responsible for vibriosis.
 
An estimated 3,600 foodborne cases of vibriosis
 
from V. parahaemolyticus occur annually in the
 
United States.  Vibriosis from V. parahaemolyticus,
 
as with Vibrio vulnificus, may cause gastroenteritis
 
and primary septicemia, although primary
 
septicemia is uncommon with V. parahaemolyticus. 
The symptoms of gastroenteritis include:  diarrhea;
 
abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, headache,
 
fever, and chills.  Symptoms start from 4 hours to 4
 
days after consumption and last for about 2½ days.
 
Everyone is susceptible to gastroenteritis from V.
 
parahaemolyticus, but septicemia usually develops
 
only in those with underlying chronic disease.
 
Vibrio vulnificus (V. vulnificus) is another 
bacterium that is responsible for vibriosis.  An 
estimated 47 foodborne cases of vibriosis 
caused by V. vulnificus (mostly septicemia)
 
occur annually in the United States, about half 
of those resulting in death.  Vibriosis caused 
by V. vulnificus can take one of two forms, 
gastroenteritis and primary septicemia.  The 
symptoms of gastroenteritis include:  nausea, 
chills, and fever.  The symptoms of primary 
septicemia include:  septic shock and death.  
Symptoms of gastroenteritis start from 16 
hours to 2 days after consumption, and death 
from septicemia may occur within 36 hours.  
Everyone is susceptible to gastroenteritis from 
V. vulnificus, but septicemia usually develops 
only in those with underlying chronic disease, 
particularly liver disease. 
Yersinia enterocolitica (Y. enterocolitica) is 
the bacterium responsible for yersiniosis.  An 
estimated 86,700 foodborne cases of yersiniosis 
occur annually in the United States.  Symptoms 
include:  fever, abdominal pain, diarrhea, 
vomiting, arthritis, and, rarely, septicemia. 
Symptoms start from 3 to 7 days after 
consumption and last from 1 to 3 days.  Everyone 
is susceptible to infection by Y. enterocolitica, but 
symptoms are more severe in the very young, 
debilitated, elderly, and immunocompromised. 
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood Processing - Public Health Impacts 
453 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
We have placed the following references on 
display in the Division of Dockets Management, 
Food and Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, 
rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. You may see 
them at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday.  As of March 29, 2011, 
FDA had verified the Web site address for the 
references it makes available as hyperlinks from 
the Internet copy of this guidance, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-
FDA Web site references after March 29, 2011. 
•	 Mead, P. S., L. Slutsker, V. Dietz, L. F. McCaig, 
J. S. Bresee, C. Shapiro, P. M. Griffin, and 
R. V. Tauxe. 1999. Food-related illness and 
death in the United States.  Emerg. Infect. 
Dis. 5:607-625. 
•	 Painter, J. 2004.  Estimated cases of Vibrio  
parahaemolyticus in the United States.  
Personal communication. 
•	 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 2000. 
The bad bug book: foodborne pathogenic 
microorganisms and natural toxins 
handbook.  http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~mow/ 
intro
.html. 
APPENDIX 7: Bacterial and Viral Pathogens of Greatest Concern in Seafood Processing - Public Health Impacts 
454 
APPENDIX 8 : PROCEDURES FOR SAFE AND SANITARY PROCESSING  AND 
IMPORTING OF FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
TITLE 21 OF THE CODE OF FEDERAL 
REGULATIONS
PART 123 – FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
SUBPART A – GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 123.3 Definitions.
§ 123.5 Current good manufacturing practice.
§ 123.6 Haz ard analysis and Hazard Analysis 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) plan. 
§ 123.7 Corrective actions.
§ 123.8 Verification.
§ 123.9 Records.
§ 123.10 Training.
§ 123.11 Sanitation control procedures.
§ 123.12 S pecial requirements for imported 
products.
SUBPART B – SMOKED AND SMOKE - 
FLAVORED FISHERY PRODUCTS 
§ 123.15 General.
§ 123.16 Process controls.
SUBPART C – RAW MOLLUSCAN 
SHELLFISH
§ 123.20 General.
§ 123.28 Source controls.
Authority: 21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 343, 346, 348, 371, 374, 
379e, 381, 393; 42 U.S.C. 241, 241l, 264. 
Source: 60 FR 65197, Dec. 18, 1995, unless otherwise 
noted. 
SUBPART A – GENERAL PROVISIONS 
§ 123.3 Definitions.
The definitions and interpretations of terms in 
section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (the Act) and in parts 110 and 117 of this 
chapter are applicable to such terms when used in 
this part, except that the definitions and terms in 
parts 110 and 117 do not govern such terms where 
such terms are redefined in this part and except 
that the terms facility, hazard, and manufacturing/
processing in parts 110 and 117 do not govern 
such terms where used in this part. The following 
definitions shall also apply:
(a) Certification number  means a unique com-
bination of letters and numbers assigned by 
a shellfish control authority to a molluscan 
shellfish processor.
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
A8 - 1 (August 2019)
(b) Critical control point means a point, step, or 
procedure in a food process at which control 
can be applied, and a food safety hazard can as 
a result be prevented, eliminated, or reduced 
to acceptable levels.
(c) Critical limit means the maximum or minimum 
value to which a physical, biological, or chemical 
parameter must be controlled at a critical 
control point to prevent, eliminate, or reduce 
to an acceptable level the occurrence of the 
identified food safety hazard.
(d) Fish means fresh or saltwater finfish, 
crustaceans, other forms of aquatic animal 
life (including, but not limited to, alligator, frog, 
aquatic turtle, jellyfish, sea cucumber, and sea 
urchin and the roe of such animals) other than 
birds or mammals, and all mollusks, where such 
animal life is intended for human consumption.
(e) Fishery product means any human food 
product in which fish is a characterizing 
ingredient.
(f) Food safety hazard  means any biological, 
chemical, or physical property that may cause 
a food to be unsafe for human consumption.
(g) Importer means either the U.S. owner or 
consignee at the time of entry into the United 
States, or the U.S. agent or representative of 
the foreign owner or consignee at the time of 
entry into the United States, who is responsible 
for ensuring that goods being offered for entry 
into the United States are in compliance with all 
laws affecting the importation. For the purposes 
of this definition, ordinarily the importer is not 
the custom house broker, the freight forwarder, 
the carrier, or the steamship representative.
(h) Molluscan shellfish means any edible species 
of fresh or frozen oysters, clams, mussels, or 
scallops, or edible portions of such species, 
except when the product consists entirely of 
the shucked adductor muscle.
(i) Preventive measure means physical, chemical, 
or other factors that can be used to control an 
identified food safety hazard.
(j) Process-monitoring instrument  means an 
instrument or device used to indicate conditions 
during processing at a critical control point.
(k) (1) Processing means, with respect to fish 
or fishery products: Handling, storing, 
preparing, heading, eviscerating, shucking, 
freezing, changing into different market forms, 
manufacturing, preserving, packing, labeling, 
dockside unloading, or holding.
(2) The regulations in this part do not apply 
to:
(i) Harvesting or transporting fish or 
fishery products, without otherwise 
engaging in processing.
(ii) Practices such as heading, eviscerating, 
or freezing intended solely to prepare 
a fish for holding on board a harvest 
vessel.
(iii) The operation of a retail establishment.
(l) Processor means any person engaged in 
commercial, custom, or institutional processing 
of fish or fishery products, either in the United 
States or in a foreign country. A processing 
includes any person engaged in the production 
of foods that are to be used in market or 
consumer tests.
(m) Scombroid toxin-forming species means tuna, 
bluefish, mahi mahi, and other species, whether 
or not in the family Scombridae, in which 
significant levels of histamine may be produced 
in the fish flesh by decarboxylation of free 
histidine as a result of exposure of the fish 
after capture to temperatures that permit the 
growth of mesophilic bacteria.
(n) Shall is used to state mandatory requirements.
(o) Shellfish control authority  means a Federal, 
State, or foreign agency, or sovereign tribal 
government, legally responsible for the 
administration of a program that includes 
activities such as classification of molluscan 
shellfish growing areas, enforcement of 
A8 - 2 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
molluscan shellfish harvesting controls, and 
certification of molluscan shellfish processors.
(p) Shellstock means raw, in-shell molluscan 
shellfish.
(q) Should is used to state recommended or 
advisory procedures or to identify recommended 
equipment.
(r) Shucked shellfish  means molluscan shellfish 
that have one or both shells removed.
(s) Smoked or smoke-flavored fishery products 
means the finished food prepared by:
(1) Treating fish with salt (sodium chloride), 
and
(2) Subjecting it to the direct action of smoke 
from burning wood, sawdust, or similar 
material and/or imparting to it the flavor 
of smoke by a means such as immersing 
it in a solution of wood smoke.
(t) Tag means a record of harvesting information 
attached to a container of shellstock by the 
harvester or processor.
[60 FR 65197, Dec. 18, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 56167, 
Sept. 17, 2015]
§ 123.5 Current good manufacturing practice.
(a) Except as provided by § 117.5(b), parts 110 
and 117 of this chapter apply in determining 
whether the facilities, methods, practices, 
and controls used to process fish and fishery 
products are safe, and whether these products 
have been processed under sanitary conditions
(b) The purpose of this part is to set forth 
requirements specific to the processing of fish 
and fishery products.
[60 FR 65197, Dec. 18, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 56167, 
Sept. 17, 2015]
§ 123.6 H azard analysis and Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) plan.
(a) Hazard analysis. Every processor shall conduct, 
or have conducted for it, a hazard analysis 
to determine whether there are food safety 
hazards that are reasonably likely to occur for 
each kind of fish and fishery product processed 
by that processor and to identify the preventive 
measures that the processor can apply to 
control those hazards. Such food safety hazards 
can be introduced both within and outside the 
processing plant environment, including food 
safety hazards that can occur before, during, 
and after harvest. A food safety hazard that 
is reasonably likely to occur is one for which 
a prudent processor would establish controls 
because experience, illness data, scientific 
reports, or other information provide a basis to 
conclude that there is a reasonable possibility 
that it will occur in the particular type of fish or 
fishery product being processed in the absence 
of those controls.
(b) The HACCP plan. Every processor shall have and 
implement a written HACCP plan whenever a 
hazard analysis reveals one or more food safety 
hazards that are reasonably likely to occur, as 
described in paragraph (a) of this section. A 
HACCP plan shall be specific to:
(1) Each location where fish and fishery 
products are processed by that processor; 
and
(2) Each kind of fish and fishery product 
processed by the processor. The plan may 
group kinds of fish and fishery products 
together, or group kinds of production 
methods together, if the food safety hazards, 
critical control points, critical limits, and 
procedures required to be identified and 
performed in paragraph (c) of this section 
are identical for all fish and fishery products 
so grouped or for all production methods 
so grouped.
A8 - 3 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
(c) The contents of the HACCP plan.  The HACCP 
plan shall, at a minimum:
(1) List the food safety hazards that are 
reasonably likely to occur, as identified 
in accordance with paragraph (a) of this 
section, and that thus must be controlled for 
each fish and fishery product. Consideration 
should be given to whether any food safety 
hazards are reasonably likely to occur as a 
result of the following:
(i) Natural toxins;
(ii) Microbiological contamination;
(iii) Chemical contamination;
(iv) Pesticides;
(v) Drug residues;
(vi) Decomposition in scombroid toxin-
forming species or in any other species 
where a food safety hazard has been 
associated with decomposition;
(vii) Parasites, where the processor has 
knowledge or has reason to know that 
the parasite-containing fish or fishery 
product will be consumed without a 
process sufficient to kill the parasites, 
or where the processor represents, 
labels, or intends for the product to be 
so consumed;
(viii) Unapproved use of direct or indirect 
food or color additives; and
(ix) Physical hazards;
(2) List the critical control points for each of the 
identified food safety hazards, including as 
appropriate:
(i) Critical control points designed to 
control food safety hazards that could 
be introduced in the processing plant 
environment; and
(ii) Critical control points designed to 
control food safety hazards introduced 
outside the processing plant environ-
ment, including food safety hazards 
that occur before, during, and after 
harvest; 
(3) List the critical limits that must be met at 
each of the critical control points;
(4) List the procedures, and frequency thereof, 
that will be used to monitor each of the 
critical control points to ensure compliance 
with the critical limits;
(5) Include any corrective action plans that 
have been developed in accordance with 
§ 123.7(b), to be followed in response to 
deviations from critical limits at critical 
control points;
(6) List the verification procedures, and 
frequency thereof, that the processor will 
use in accordance with § 123.8(a);
(7) Provide for a recordkeeping system that 
documents the monitoring of the critical 
control points. The records shall contain 
the actual values and observations obtained 
during monitoring.
(d) Signing and dating the HACCP plan. 
(1) The HACCP plan shall be signed and dated, 
either by the most responsible individual 
onsite at the processing facility or by a 
higher level official of the processor. This 
signature shall signify that the HACCP plan 
has been accepted for implementation by 
the firm.
(2) The HACCP plan shall be dated and signed:
(i) Upon initial acceptance;
(ii) Upon any modification; and
(iii) Upon verification of the plan in accord-
ance with § 123.8(a)(1).
(e) Products subject to other regulations. For 
fish and fishery products that are subject to 
the requirements of part 113 or 114 of this 
chapter, the HACCP plan need not list the food 
A8 - 4 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
safety hazard associated with the formation 
of Clostridium botulinum toxin in the finished, 
hermetically sealed container, nor list the 
controls to prevent that food safety hazard. A 
HACCP plan for such fish and fishery products 
shall address any other food safety hazards 
that are reasonably likely to occur.
(f) Sanitation. Sanitation controls may be 
included in the HACCP plan. However, to the 
extent that they are monitored in accordance 
with § 123.11(b) they need not be included in 
the HACCP plan, and vice versa.
(g) Legal basis.  Failure of a processor to have 
and implement a HACCP plan that complies 
with this section whenever a HACCP plan is 
necessary, otherwise operate in accordance 
with the requirements of this part, shall 
render the fish or fishery products of that 
processor adulterated under section 402(a)
(4) of the act. Whether a processor’s actions 
are consistent with ensuring the safety of food 
will be determined through an evaluation of 
the processors overall implementation of its 
HACCP plan, if one is required.
§ 123.7 Corrective actions.
(a) Whenever a deviation from a critical limit 
occurs, a processor shall take corrective 
action either by:
(1) Following a corrective action plan that is 
appropriate for the particular deviation, or
(2) Following the procedures in paragraph (c) 
of this section.
(b) Processors may develop written corrective 
action plans, which become part of their HACCP 
plans in accordance with § 123.6(c)(5), by 
which they predetermine the corrective actions 
that they will take whenever there is a deviation 
from a critical limit. A corrective action plan 
that is appropriate for a particular deviation is 
one that describes the steps to be taken and 
assigns responsibility for taking those steps, 
to ensure that:
(1) No product enters commerce that is 
either injurious to health or is otherwise 
adulterated as a result of the deviation; and
(2) The cause of the deviation is corrected.
(c) When a deviation from a critical limit occurs and 
the processor does not have a corrective action 
plan that is appropriate for that deviation, the 
processor shall:
(1) Segregate and hold the affected product, at 
least until the requirements of paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (c)(3) of this section are met;
(2) Perform or obtain a review to determine 
the acceptability of the affected product for 
distribution. The review shall be performed 
by an individual or individuals who have 
adequate training or experience to perform 
such a review. Adequate training may or 
may not include training in accordance with 
§ 123.10;
(3) Take corrective action, when necessary, with 
respect to the affected product to ensure 
that no product enters commerce that is 
either injurious to health or is otherwise 
adulterated as a result of the deviation;
(4) Take corrective action, when necessary, to 
correct the cause of the deviation;
(5) Perform or obtain timely reassessment by 
an individual or individuals who have been 
trained in accordance with § 123.10, to 
determine whether the HACCP plan needs to 
be modified to reduce the risk of recurrence 
of the deviation, and modify the HACCP 
plan as necessary.
(d) All correction actions taken in accordance wiht 
this section shall be fully documented in records 
that are subject to verification in accordance 
with § 123.8(a)(3)(ii) and the recordkeeping 
requirements of § 123.9.
A8 - 5 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
§ 123.8 Verification.
(a) Overall verification. Every processor shall verify 
that the HACCP plan is adequate to control 
food safety hazards that are reasonably likely 
to occur, and that the plan is being effectively 
implemented. Verification shall include, at a 
minimum:
(1) Reassessment of the HACCP plan.  A 
reassessment of the adequacy of the HACCP 
plan whenever any changes occur that 
could affect the hazard analysis or alter the 
HACCP plan in any way or at least annually. 
Such changes may include changes in the 
following: Raw materials or source of raw 
materials, product formulation, processing 
methods or systems, finished product 
distribution systems, or the intended use 
or consumers of the finished product. The 
reassessment shall be performed by an 
individual or individuals who have been 
trained in accordance with § 123.10. The 
HACCP plan shall be modified immediately 
whenever a reassessment reveals that the 
plan is no longer adequate to fully meet the 
requirements of § 123.6(c).
(2) Ongoing verification activities.  Ongoing 
verification activities including:
(i) A review of any consumer complaints 
that have been received by the 
processor to determine whether they 
relate to the performance of critical 
control points or reveal the existence 
of unidentified critical control points;
(ii) The calibration of process-monitoring 
instruments; and,
(iii) At the option of the processor, the 
performing of periodic end-product 
or in-process testing.
(3) Records review. A review, including signing 
and dating, by an individual who has been 
trained in accordance with § 123.10, of the 
records that document:
(i) The monitoring of critical control points. 
The purpose of this review shall be, at 
a minimum, to ensure that the records 
are complete and to verify that they 
document values that are within the 
critical limits. This review shall occur 
within 1 week of the day that the records 
are made;
(ii) The taking of corrective actions. The 
purpose of this review shall be, at a 
minimum, to ensure that the records are 
complete and to verify that appropriate 
corrective actions were taken in accor-
dance with § 123.7. This review shall 
occur within 1 week of the day that the 
records are made; and
(iii) The calibrating of any process control 
instruments used at critical control 
points and the performing of any periodic 
end-product or in-process testing that 
is part of the processor’s verification 
activities. The purpose of these reviews 
shall be, at a minimum, to ensure that 
the records are complete, and that these 
activities occurred in accordance with the 
processor’s written procedures. These 
reviews shall occur within a reasonable 
time after the records are made.
(b) Corrective actions. Processors shall immediately 
follow the procedures in § 123.7 whenever any 
verification procedure, including the review of a 
consumer complaint, reveals the need to take 
a corrective action.
(c) Reassessment of the hazard analysis. Whenever 
a processor does not have a HACCP plan because 
a hazard analysis has revealed no food safety 
hazards that are reasonably likely to occur, 
the processor shall reassess the adequacy of 
that hazard analysis whenever there are any 
changes that could reasonably affect whether 
a food safety hazard now exists. Such changes 
may include, but are not limited to changes 
in: Raw materials or source of raw materials, 
product formulation, processing methods or 
systems, finished product distribution systems, 
A8 - 6 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
or the intended use or consumers of the finished 
product. The reassessment shall be performed 
by an individual or individuals who have been 
trained in accordance with § 123.10.
(d) Recordkeeping. The calibration of process-
monitoring instruments, and the performing 
of any periodic end-product and in-process 
testing, in accordance with paragraphs (a)(2)(ii) 
through (iii) of this section shall be documented 
in records that are subject to the recordkeeping 
requirements of § 123.9.
§ 123.9 Records.
(a) General requirements. All records required by 
this part shall include:
(1) The name and location of the processor or 
importer;
(2) The date and time of the activity that the 
record reflects;
(3) The signature or initials of the person per-
forming the operation; and
(4) Where appropriate, the identity of the 
product and the production code, if any. 
Processing and other information shall be 
entered on records at the time that it is 
observed.
(b) Record retention. 
(1) All records required by this part shall 
be retained at the processing facility or 
importer’s place of business in the United 
States for at least 1 year after the date they 
were prepared in the case of refrigerated 
products and for at least 2 years after the 
date they were prepared in the case of 
frozen, preserved, or shelf-stable products.
(2) Records that relate to the general adequacy 
of equipment or processes being used by a 
processor, including the results of scientific 
studies and evaluations, shall be retained 
at the processing facility or the importer’s 
place of business in the United States for 
at least 2 years after their applicability to 
the product being produced at the facility.
(3) If the processing facility is closed for a pro-
longed period between seasonal packs, or 
if record storage capacity is limited on a 
processing vessel or at a remote processing 
site, the records may be transferred to 
some other reasonably accessible location 
at the end of the seasonal pack but shall 
be immediately returned for official review 
upon demand.
(c) Official review. All records required by this part 
and all plans and procedures required by this 
part shall be available for official review and 
copying at reasonable times.
(d) Public disclosure. 
(1) Subject to the limitations in paragraph (d)
(2) of this section, all plans and records 
required by this part are not available for 
public disclosure unless they have been 
previously disclosed to the public as defined 
in § 20.81 of this chapter or they relate 
to a product or ingredient that has been 
abandoned and they no longer represent a 
trade secret or confidential commercial or 
financial information as defined in § 20.61 
of this chapter.
(2) However, these records and plans may be 
subject to disclosure to the extent that 
they are otherwise publicly available, or 
that disclosure could not reasonably be 
expected to cause a competitive hardship, 
such as generic-type HACCP plans that 
reflect standard industry practices.
(e) Tags. Tags as defined in § 123.3(t) are not 
subject to the requirements of this section 
unless they are used to fulfill the requirements 
of § 123.28(c).
(f) Records maintained on computers.  The 
maintenance of records on computers is 
acceptable, provided that appropriate controls 
are implemented to ensure the integrity of the 
electronic data and signatures.
A8 - 7 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
§ 123.10 Training.
At a minimum, the following functions shall be 
performed by an individual who has successfully 
completed training in the application of HACCP 
principles to fish and fishery product processing at 
least equivalent to that received under standardized 
curriculum recognized as adequate by the U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration or who is otherwise 
qualified through job experience to perform these 
functions. Job experience will qualify an individual to 
perform these functions if it has provided knowledge 
at least equivalent to that provided through the 
standardized curriculum.
(a) Developing a HACCP plan, which could include 
adapting a model or generic-type HACCP plan, 
that is appropriate for a specific processor, in 
order to meet the requirements of § 123.6(b);
(b) Reassessing and modifying the HACCP plan in 
accordance with the corrective action procedures 
specified in § 123.7(c)(5), the HACCP plan 
in accordance with the verification activities 
specified in § 123.8(a)(1), and the hazard 
analysis in accordance with the verification 
activities specified in § 123.8(c); and
(c) Performing the record review required by § 
123.8(a)(3); The trained individual need not 
be an employee of the processor.
§ 123.11 Sanitation control procedures.
(a) Sanitation SOP. Each processor should have 
and implement a written sanitation standard 
operating procedure (herein referred to as 
SSOP) or similar document that is specific to 
each location where fish and fishery products 
are produced. The SSOP should specify how the 
processor will meet those sanitation conditions 
and practices that are to be monitored in 
accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) Sanitation monitoring.  Each processor shall 
monitor the conditions and practices during 
processing with sufficient frequency to ensure, 
at a minimum, conformance with those con-
ditions and practices specified in part 110 of 
this chapter and in subpart B of part 117 of 
this chapter that are both appropriate to the 
plant and the food being processed and relate 
to the following:
(1) Safety of the water that comes into contact 
with food or food contact surfaces, or is 
used in the manufacture of ice;
(2) Condition and cleanliness of food contact 
surfaces, including utensils, gloves, and 
outer garments;
(3) Prevention of cross-contamination from 
insanitary objects to food, food packaging 
material, and other food contact surfaces, 
including utensils, gloves, and outer 
garments, and from raw product to cooked 
product;
(4) Maintenance of hand washing, hand 
sanitizing, and toilet facilities;
(5) Protection of food, food packaging material, 
and food contact surfaces from adulteration 
with lubricants, fuel, pesticides, cleaning 
compounds, sanitizing agents, condensate, 
and other chemical, physical, and biological 
contaminants;
(6) Proper labeling, storage, and use of toxic 
compounds;
(7) Control of employee health conditions 
that could result in the microbiological 
contamination of food, food packaging 
materials, and food contact surfaces; and
(8) Exclusion of pests from the food plant.
The processor shall correct in a timely manner, 
those conditions and practices that are not met.
(c) Sanitation control records.  Each processor 
shall maintain sanitation control records that, 
at a minimum, document the monitoring and 
corrections prescribed by paragraph (b) of 
this section. These records are subject to the 
requirements of § 123.9.
A8 - 8 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
(d) Relationship to HACCP plan. Sanitation controls 
may be included in the HACCP plan, required 
by § 123.6(b). However, to the extent that they 
are monitored in accordance with paragraph 
(b) of this section they need not be included 
in the HACCP plan, and vice versa. 
[60 FR 65197, Dec. 18, 1995, as amended at 80 FR 56167, 
Sept. 17, 2015]
§ 123.12 Spe cial requirements for imported products.
This section sets forth specific requirements for 
imported fish and fishery products.
(a) Importer verification. Every importer of fish or 
fishery products shall either:
(1) Obtain the fish or fishery product from a 
country that has an active memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) or similar agreement 
with the Food and Drug Administration, 
that covers the fish or fishery product and 
documents the equivalency or compliance of 
the inspection system of the foreign country 
with the U.S. system, accurately reflects 
the current situation between the signing 
parties, and is functioning and enforceable 
in its entirety; or
(2) Have and implement written verification 
procedures for ensuring that the fish and 
fishery products that they offer for import 
into the United States were processed in 
accordance with the requirements of this 
part. The procedures shall list at a minimum: 
(i) Product specifications that are designed 
to ensure that the product is not 
adulterated under section 402 of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
because it may be injurious to health or 
have been processed under insanitary 
conditions, and,
(ii) Affirmative steps that may include 
any of the following:
(A) Obtaining from the foreign pro-
cessor the HACCP and sanitation 
monitoring records required by this 
part that relate to the specific lot 
of fish or fishery products being 
offered for import;
(B) Obtaining either a continuing 
or lot-by-lot certificate from an 
appropriate foreign government 
inspection authority or competent 
third party certifying that the 
imported fish or fishery product 
is or was processed in accordance 
with the requirements of this part;
(C) Regularly inspecting the foreign 
processor’s facilities to ensure that 
the imported fish or fishery product 
is being processed in accordance 
with the requirements of this part;
(D) Maintaining on file a copy, in 
English, of the foreign processor’s 
HACCP plan, and a written gua-
rantee from the foreign processor 
that the imported fish or fishery 
product is processed in accordance 
with the requirements of the part;
(E) Periodically testing the imported 
fish or fishery product, and main-
taining on file a copy, in English, 
of a written guarantee from 
the foreign processor that the 
imported fish or fishery product 
is processed in accordance with 
the requirements of this part or,
(F) Other such verification measures 
as appropriate that provide an 
equivalent level of assurance of 
compliance with the requirements 
of this part.
(b) Competent third party. An importer may hire a 
competent third party to assist with or perform 
any or all of the verification activities specified 
in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, including 
A8 - 9 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
writing the importer’s verification procedures 
on the importer’s behalf.
(c) Records. The importer shall maintain records, 
in English, that document the performance 
and results of the affirmative steps specified 
in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section. These 
records shall be subject to the applicable 
provisions of § 123.9.
(d) Determination of compliance. There must be 
evidence that all fish and fishery products 
offered for entry into the United States have 
been processed under conditions that comply 
with this part. If assurances do not exist that 
the imported fish or fishery product has been 
processed under conditions that are equivalent 
to those required of domestic processors 
under this part, the product will appear to be 
adulterated and will be denied entry.
Subpart B—Smoked and Smoke-Flavored 
Fishery Products
§ 123.15 General.
This subpart augments subpart A of this part by 
setting forth specific requirements for processing 
smoked and smoke-flavored fishery products. 
§ 123.16 Process controls.
In order to meet the requirements of subpart A 
of this part, processors of smoked and smoke-
flavored fishery products, except those subject to 
the requirements of part 113 or 114 of this chapter, 
shall include in their HACCP plans how they are 
controlling the food safety hazard associated with 
the formation of toxin by Clostridium botulinum 
for at least as long as the shelf life of the product 
under normal and moderate abuse conditions.
Subpart C—Raw Molluscan Shellfish
§ 123.20 General.
This subpart augments subpart A of this part by 
setting forth specific requirements for processing 
fresh or frozen molluscan shellfish, where such 
processing does not include a treatment that 
ensures the destruction of vegetative cells of 
microorganisms of public health concern.
§ 123.28 Source controls.
(a) In order to meet the requirements of subpart 
A of this part as they apply to microbiological 
contamination, chemical contamination, 
natural toxins, and related food safety hazards, 
processors shall include in their HACCP plans 
how they are controlling the origin of the 
molluscan shellfish they process to ensure 
that the conditions of paragraphs (b), (c), and 
(d) of this section are met.
(b) Processors shall only process molluscan shellfish 
harvested from growing waters approved for 
harvesting by a shellfish control authority. In 
the case of molluscan shellfish harvested from 
U.S. Federal waters, the requirements of this 
paragraph will be met so long as the shellfish 
have not been harvested from waters that have 
been closed to harvesting by an agency of the 
Federal government.
(c) To meet the requirements of paragraph 
(b) of this section, processors who receive 
shellstock shall accept only shellstock from 
a harvester that is in compliance with such 
licensure requirements as may apply to the 
harvesting of molluscan shellfish or from a 
processor that is certified by a shellfish control 
authority, and that has a tag affixed to each 
container of shellstock. The tag shall bear, 
at a minimum, the information required in § 
1240.60(b) of this chapter. In place of the tag, 
bulk shellstock shipments may be accompanied 
by a bill of lading or similar shipping document 
that contains the information required in § 
A8 - 10 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
1240.60(b) of this chapter. Processors shall 
maintain records that document that all 
shellstock have met the requirements of this 
section. These records shall document:
(1) The date of harvest;
(2) The location of harvest by State and site;
(3) The quantity and type of shellfish;
(4) The date of receipt by the processor; and
(5) The name of the harvester, the name or 
registration number of the harvester’s 
vessel, or an identification number issued 
to the harvester by the shellfish control 
authority.
(d) To meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of 
this section, processors who receive shucked 
molluscan shellfish shall accept only containers 
of shucked molluscan shellfish that bear a label 
that complies with § 1240.60(c) of this chapter. 
Processors shall maintain records that document 
that all shucked molluscan shellfish have met 
the requirements of this section. These records 
shall document:
(1) The date of receipt;
(2) The quantity and type of shellfish; and
(3) The name and certification number of the 
packer or repacker of the product.
PART 1240 – CONTROL OF COMMUNICABLE 
DISEASES
1. The authority citation for 21 CFR Part 1240 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: Secs 215, 311, 361, 368 of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 216, 243, 264, 271).
2. Section 1240.3 is amended by revising 
paragraph (r), and by adding new paragraphs 
(s), (t) and (u) to read as follows:
§ 1240.3 General Definitions.
a. Molluscan Shellfish. Any edible species of 
fresh or frozen oysters, clams, mussels, 
and scallops or edible portions thereof, 
except when the product consists entirely 
of the shucked adductor muscle.
b. Certification number  means a unique 
combination of letters and numbers 
assigned by a shellfish control authority 
to a molluscan shellfish processor.
c. Shellfish control authority means a Federal, 
State, or foreign agency, or sovereign tribal 
government, legally responsible for the 
administration of a program that includes 
activities such as classification of molluscan 
shellfish growing areas, enforcement of 
molluscan shellfish harvesting controls, 
and certification of molluscan shellfish 
processors.
d. Tag means a record of harvesting 
information attached to a container of 
shellstock by the harvester or processor.
3. Section 1240.60 is amended by revising the 
section heading, by redesignating the existing 
text as paragraph (a) and adding the word 
“molluscan” before the word “shellfish” the 
two times that it appears, and by adding new 
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) to read as follows:  
A8 - 11 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
§ 1240.60 Molluscan Shellfish
a. A person shall not offer for transportation, 
or transport, in interstate traffic any 
molluscan shellfish handled or stored in 
such an insanitary manner, or grown in 
an area so contaminated, as to render 
such molluscan shellfish likely to become 
agents in, and their transportation likely to 
contribute to the spread of communicable 
disease from one State or possession to 
another. 
b. All shellstock shall bear a tag that discloses 
the date and place they were harvested 
(by State and site), type and quantity 
of shellfish, and by whom they were 
harvested (i.e., the identification number 
assigned to the harvester by the shellfish 
control authority, where applicable or, 
if such identification numbers are not 
assigned, the name of the harvester 
or the name or registration number of 
the harvester’s vessel). In place of the 
tag, bulk shellstock shipments may be 
accompanied by a bill of lading or similar 
shipping document that contains the same 
information.
c. All containers of shucked molluscan 
shellfish shall bear a label that identifies 
the name, address, and certification 
number of the packer or repacker of the 
molluscan shellfish.
d. Any molluscan shellfish without such a 
tag, shipping document, or label, or with 
a tag, shipping document, or label that 
does not bear all the information required 
by paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
shall be subject to seizure or refusal of 
entry, and destruction.
[40 FR 5620, Feb. 6, 1975, as amended at 60 FR 
65202, Dec. 18, 1995]
A8 - 12 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
NOTES:
A8 - 13 (August 2019)
Appendix 8: Procedures for Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products 
APPENDIX 9 : ALLERGEN CROSS-CONTACT PREVENTION
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
INTRODUCTION.
In addition to effective cleaning and sanitation 
controls, processors should also consider processing 
controls to prevent or minimize the likelihood of 
the allergen cross-contact. 
Allergen cross-contact may result in the un-
intentional introduction of allergens into foods that 
do not properly declare the allergens on the labels. 
Allergen cross-contact controls are intended to 
provide separation by time and space between 
allergen-containing products and non-allergen-
containing products, or between products consisting 
of or containing different allergens. These controls 
should be considered at all points in processing 
where cross-contact or inaccurate allergen 
declarations can be prevented. Controls may be 
considered at specific processing steps and should 
include comprehensive procedures such as process 
scheduling, traffic control, physical segregation, 
and air filtration. Allergen cross-contact controls 
should also be considered and used when creating 
and processing new product samples for public 
consumption. Development of written procedures 
and posting appropriate allergen cross-contact 
control procedures will help ensure the consistency 
in the application of controls. Implementation of 
a recordkeeping system provides a method of 
tracing ingredients and labels and identifying their 
disposition. The development and oversight of 
processing cross-contact controls requires an 
understanding of the allergens and the health 
hazard they present in addition to effective methods 
for prevention of allergen cross-contact.
Seafood processors must meet the requirements 
of 21 CFR 117.4. This regulation requires that all 
individuals engaged in manufacturing, processing, 
packing and holding food (including temporary and 
seasonal personnel) and supervisors must have 
the education, training, or experience necessary to 
ensure the production of safe food as appropriate 
to their assigned duties and that supervisory staff 
have the knowledge necessary to supervise the 
production of safe food. Seafood processors must 
ensure that their employees have been trained in 
the controls necessary to prevent allergen cross-
contact. Since this training is specific to food 
safety, records of the training must be maintained 
in accordance with 21 CFR 117.4. The training 
should, at a minimum:
•	 Identify allergens and the hazard they present 
to sensitive individuals;
•	 Cover the principles of allergen cross-contact 
prevention; and
•	 Specifically cover the processor’s allergen cross-
contact prevention protocols, including corrective 
actions, and the required recordkeeping.
The following recommendations may not apply 
to every type of facility and situation. FDA has 
identified these recommendations as a means 
of assisting facilities as foundational information 
for them to better understand and evaluate or 
create an allergen cross-contact control program 
based on the needs of their facility. These are 
recommendations and considerations only. FDA 
does not legally require firms to adopt any of the 
recommendations.
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
A9 - 1 (August 2019)
RECEIVING.
Preventing allergen cross-contact begins when 
labels and ingredients are received at a facility. 
Consider the following when receiving materials 
to control allergen cross-contact as appropriate 
for the facility needs:
•	 Compare the received preprinted labels and 
the labels of ingredients received against 
product specifications. Check for any changes 
in the list of declared allergenic ingredients. 
Segregate and hold ingredients and labels 
whose allergen declarations do not match the 
product specification in a defined area with 
restricted access. The segregated ingredients 
and labels should be tagged to indicate that 
they should not be used. Close attention should 
be paid to sub-ingredients.
•	 Inspect materials for damaged packaging and 
exposed/leaking materials. Damaged packages 
should be removed, sealed and segregated 
from the shipment for return to the supplier 
or destroyed. Handle damaged containers of 
allergens in a manner that prevents allergen 
cross-contact during receipt and storage, if 
they must be accepted with the shipment. 
Segregation areas should be clearly identified, 
and damaged packages should be marked 
as not to be used. Do not move damaged or 
leaking containers or packages into production 
areas unless allergen-containing ingredients or 
materials have been contained.  
•	 Clearly identify the allergen content on packages 
(e.g., case, pallet, bag, or carton) of incoming 
ingredients immediately upon receipt to ensure 
that the allergen content of each can be clearly 
identified during storage and on the production 
floor when in use. A color-code system that is 
easily understood and preferably identifies the 
specific allergen hazard can be utilized. 
Note: Ensure color codes are clear, and not 
in conflict with other coding schemes in use 
at the facility.
•	 Establish and implement controls to ensure 
the integrity of ingredients received in bulk 
including those delivered by railcar or tanker. 
For example, verification of tanker and/or railcar 
cleaning for allergens (e.g. hopper, boxcar, 
tanker, etc. wash-tags), prior load information, 
clean transfer areas and equipment cleaning. 
o Reject the shipment if identified 
requirements have not been met.
STORAGE.
Storage of allergens and allergen-containing 
materials should be done to minimize the risk of 
allergen cross-contact in a facility. Consider the 
following when establishing and implementing 
procedures to control allergen cross-contact during 
storage that are appropriate for your facility:
•	 Segregate allergen-containing ingredients. 
Use of separate storage areas (e.g. dedicated 
allergen storage room, or shelving) provides 
a physical separation for allergen and non-
allergen-containing ingredients. The physical 
separation should ensure that allergen-
containing ingredients are stored in a 
warehouse, cooler, or storage areas where 
they do not come in contact with each other 
or any non-allergen containing ingredient. 
This dedicated area should only be used for 
allergen-containing ingredients and not used 
for non-allergen-containing ingredients or other 
products at any time. 
•	 Establish procedures for staging and storage 
of food allergens and allergen-containing 
ingredients below non-allergens when dedicated 
areas are not available. This will help to prevent 
inadvertent cross-contact in the event that the 
packaging material used to store the allergen 
is damaged and subsequent leakage occurs.  
•	 Use color coding, tagging, or other distinctive 
marks to identify containers of ingredients 
or foods that contain different food allergens 
when practical. This could include using colored 
shrink-wrap or colored placards, distinct pallets, 
and unique totes or bins. A dedicated color 
may be assigned to each of the major allergens 
defined by FALCPA. For example, prominently 
post a chart in key processing and ingredient 
storage areas that identifies the assignment of 
the major food allergen and its corresponding 
color.
Note: Ensure the color codes are clear, and 
not in conflict with other color coding schemes 
being used in the facility.  
•	 Use dedicated bins or containers that can be 
closed in a secure manner for storing allergen-
containing ingredients and allergen-containing 
products.
A9 - 2 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
•	 Establish procedures to ensure that non-
allergen-containing ingredients or products 
are not mixed with allergen-containing 
materials, or that different allergens are not 
mixed when using bulk storage tanks or silos. 
Use visual identifiers (such as tags or labels), 
computerized verification checks, lockouts 
over valve openings, and requirements that 
inspections and sign-offs on a valve and tank 
set up before receiving or using material in a 
tank or silo as appropriate. 
•	
Establish procedures to inspect warehouse 
handling equipment (dollies, forklifts, etc.) 
used to transport the ingredients containing 
allergens.  
•	
Establish and implement procedures for 
damaged packaging or containers and the 
resulting spills or leaks of allergen-containing 
ingredients or products.
PROCESSING.
Allergen cross-contact can be prevented during 
food processing by providing separation in time and 
space between allergen-containing materials and 
non-allergen-containing materials, and between 
materials containing different allergens. The ap-
propriate allergen control measures are facility 
and product dependent. When choosing which 
measures to take, the processor should consider 
the properties of the allergenic ingredients being 
used, the nature of the processing system and 
production facility, the product being produced, 
and the manufacturing processes.
A. Facility, equipment and process design
Allergen cross-contact of ingredients, in-process 
materials and final product can be minimized 
by utilizing dedicated facilities, processing and 
packaging lines, and equipment. The following 
considerations should be made when designing 
the facility, equipment and processes to prevent 
allergen cross-contact:
•	
Incorporate features in overall plant layout and 
process design that will minimize the potential 
for allergen cross-contact. 
•	 Design traffic patterns (e.g., avoid crossovers 
of open production lines) in the facility to 
prevent allergen cross-contact. Develop a 
unidirectional traffic flow to avoid unrestricted 
movement of employees between allergen-
containing and allergen-free zones in the plant.  
For example, designing in a buffer room or 
clean area between the two zones.
•	 Establish air flow controls in the facility, to 
prevent airborne allergen particulate matter 
from being brought into allergen-free zones (e.g. 
introduce a positive air pressure environment in 
the packaging area or use micro air filtration).  
•	 Provide shielding, permanent and/or temporary 
partitions, covers, and catch pans to protect 
exposed unpacked product as necessary.
•	 Review facility and process design for new 
installations or upgrades to assess for the 
potential of allergen cross-contact. 
•	 Configure processing lines with sufficient space 
or physical barriers between them to minimize 
any allergen cross-contact as a result of normal 
product spillage and splattering from processing 
or cleaning.  
•	 Consider dedicating a section of the facility 
for processing of products containing specific 
allergens as appropriate and/or practical. 
•	
Consider the configuration and use of your 
processing lines: 
o Use separate processing lines for products 
that contain different types of allergens, 
when possible.  
o Line crossovers should be avoided
o Enclosing processing equipment
•	 Dedicate utensils, employee apparel (e.g., 
aprons and gloves), and tools to specific 
processing lines or products, when possible. The 
utensils, employee apparel, and tools should be 
subjected to an allergen cleaning and sanitation 
procedure after use and stored in a manner to 
prevent allergen cross-contact.
•	 Use dedicated color coded equipment, tools, 
employee apparel, and utensils for handling 
allergen-containing ingredients or finished 
products, when possible. 
•	 Restrict employee movement in facilities to 
minimize the spread of allergen-containing 
residues to non-allergen-containing products. 
Visually identify employees that work on lines 
A9 - 3 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
containing different allergens (e.g., different 
color uniforms). In addition: 
o Restrict personnel from working between 
processing lines containing allergenic 
ingredients and non-allergenic ingredients 
during the same shift.  
o Implement procedures for requesting 
change of work clothing when employees 
move from an allergen to a non-allergen 
area, for example, in dusty environments.  
Likewise, gloves and hats can be unintended 
carriers of dust and seeds and should be 
changed as often as necessary to prevent 
allergen cross-contact.
o Initiate controls of personnel movement and 
practices to prevent allergen cross-contact 
during breaks and meals.
•	 Utilize a valve system for closed processing lines 
to effectively move  and clear allergenic and 
non-allergenic ingredients through the facility. 
Consider the following when valves are used:
o Ensure that all valves are clearly marked.
o Inspect valves routinely for potential leaks. 
o Ensure valves are secured into the 
appropriate position. 
•	 Control the movement of materials to minimize 
the spread of allergenic materials throughout 
the facility. 
o Ensure allergen-containing materials are 
covered, contained, and identified when in 
transit in the facility. 
o Move collection bins, totes, and containers 
with allergen-containing materials, 
ingredients, and wastes in a manner that 
prevents allergen cross-contact with other 
processing lines. 
o Collect and contain waste materials (e.g., 
spills, defective and unusable products, used 
ingredient packaging) on a continuous basis, 
especially those containing allergens, during 
production. Contain the waste materials 
in sealable containers such as covered 
collection bins, totes, and containers. 
These bins, totes, and containers should 
be labeled and/or color coded to identify 
which allergens they contain. 
•	
Develop and implement procedures to minimize 
aerosolized allergenic material. For example, 
dust generation and accumulation on equipment 
can be minimized by adding liquid ingredients to 
mixers before or at the same time as powders, 
using dust collection systems (i.e., local 
exhaust, ventilation systems and/or vacuum 
systems), controlling surrounding dust sources, 
and covering equipment.  
•	 Stage allergen-containing materials in 
designated areas before opening, weighing 
or transferring them to the processing line. 
Care should be taken to prevent the allergen-
containing materials from spreading outside 
the staging area(s). Position the staging 
area(s) so that potential exposure to allergens 
is minimized, such as locating the staging 
area immediately near point of entry into the 
product. The staging location should facilitate 
the transport of materials to the line without the 
need to cross other lines where non-allergen-
containing products are produced. 
•	
Control of allergen-containing and non-allergen 
containing oils for fryers. Control can be 
managed through product scheduling or use 
of dedicated fryers to minimize the risk of 
allergen cross-contact.
B. Production scheduling
Controlling the scheduling of production runs can 
be an effective method for preventing allergen 
cross-contact.  Considerations that should be made 
are as follows:
•	 Implement production scheduling to separate 
the manufacture of allergen-containing products 
from non-allergen-containing products by time. 
A separation between allergen-containing 
products and non-allergen-containing products 
can be achieved by establishing a production 
order; that is, producing the foods in a sequence 
whereby the food with the fewest allergens or 
no allergen is produced first and the food with 
the most allergens is produced last, combined 
with effective allergen cleaning and sanitation 
procedures between changeover of productions 
containing different allergens.  
•	 Add the allergenic ingredient as late in the 
production process as possible to minimize the 
amount of equipment and the time that the 
processor’s production area comes in contact 
with the allergen.  
A9 - 4 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
•	 Cluster allergen-containing runs to reduce the 
number of required changeovers and to reduce 
the risk of allergen cross-contact. 
REWORK AND WORK-IN-PROGRESS (WIP).
The term rework refers to finished or partially 
finished products that are reincorporated into the 
manufacturing process. Work-in-Progress (WIP) 
consists of partially finished products that are 
between different production stages/ steps. Both 
rework and WIP can increase the risk of introducing 
allergens, either by erroneous addition of allergen-
containing rework/WIP into a product that does not 
contain the specific allergen(s) as ingredients, or 
by cross-contact of allergen-containing materials 
with non-allergen-containing materials through 
shared containers or utensils during holding or 
storage. Since rework/WIP containing an allergen 
is inherently risky to handle, processors should 
assess their rework and WIP processes, identify 
opportunities for cross-contact or accidental in-
clusion of unintentional allergens, and develop 
written procedures to prevent their occurrence. 
Controls can include: 
•	
Storage of rework and WIP materials in labelled 
closed containers indicating the contents. The 
labeling should be consistent with the coding 
used in your allergenic ingredients controls and 
identify the product (e.g., intended finished 
product, batch code, and REWORK, or WIP). 
Rework/WIP materials collected online and 
in the processing area should be collected 
in similarly marked containers. Assume that 
rework/WIP materials obtained from any step 
of the production process include all allergens 
identified in the intended finished product 
specification.
•	 Storage of rework and WIP materials in desig-
nated areas that are clearly marked.
•	 Implementation of measures, whenever prac-
tical, that require adding rework back into the 
production of only identical finished product, 
rather than another product with the same/
similar allergen components. If this is not 
feasible or practical, predetermine and identify 
what specific product to which rework materials 
may be added to and develop a system that 
tracks and ensures that rework materials 
are only incorporated into items on that pre-
determined list. The product specification for 
each of the predetermined products should 
identify all the allergens incorporated within 
the rework materials.
•	 Implementation of and maintaining a record-
keeping system for monitoring allergens for the 
rework/ WIP material for comparison against the 
label of the new finished product to ensure the 
allergens from the rework/WIP material match.
•	 Attaching information sheet(s) to each container 
of rework/WIP that identifies the allergen-
containing ingredient, name of product, the 
specific production line the materials will 
be added to, the date the rework/WIP was 
produced, and the batch and/or lot number to 
which the rework/WIP was added.
•	 Using a recordkeeping system to control, track, 
reconcile, and inventory rework/WIP. Certain 
information should be considered as necessary 
to track the movement of rework and WIP and 
be identified accordingly.
•	 Conducting mock internal ingredient traceability 
drills to assure the facility has the capability 
of tracing the path and final destination and/
or disposition of all rework, whether or not it 
was incorporated into finished food products 
or disposed of due to the lack of a suitable 
finished product match.
A9 - 5 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
BIBLIOGRAPHY
We have placed the following references on display in the Division of Dockets Management, Food and 
Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. The documents are available 
at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of July 2018, FDA had verified 
the Web site address for the references it makes available as hyperlinks from the Internet copy of this 
guidance, but FDA is not responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-FDA Web site references after 
July 2018. 
•	 Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, and University of Nebraska. 2009. Components of 
an effective allergen control plan: A framework for food processors.  
•	 FoodDrinkEurope. 2013. Guidance on Food Allergen Management for Food Manufacturers. 
•	 Stone, W., and K. Stevenson. 2009. Managing Allergens in Food Processing Establishments 4
th 
Edition. Grocery Manufacturers Association.
•	 Taylor, S.L and S. L. Hefle 2005. Allergen control. Food Technology, 59:40-43, 75.
A9 - 6 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
NOTES:
A9 - 7 (August 2019)
Appendix 9: Allergen Cross-Contact Prevention
APPENDIX 10 : CLEANING AND SANITATION 
FOR THE CONTROL OF ALLERGENS 
This guidance represents the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA’s) current thinking on this topic. It does not create or 
confer any rights for or on any person and does not operate to bind FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach 
if the approach satisfies the requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations. If you want to discuss an alternative 
approach, contact the FDA staff responsible for implementing this guidance. If you cannot identify the appropriate FDA staff, 
call the telephone number listed on the title page of this guidance.
INTRODUCTION.
Appropriate cleaning procedures are essential for 
preventing allergen cross-contact in a processing 
facility, particularly when allergen-containing and 
non-allergen-containing foods or foods with different 
allergen-containing components are manufactured 
on the same processing lines. Cleaning is also 
essential for preventing transfer of allergens from 
soiled containers, utensils, employee apparel (e.g., 
aprons and gloves), and tools into food products. The 
main purpose of an allergen cleaning program is the 
removal of the allergens from areas of the processor, 
including processing and packaging equipment, 
food-contact surfaces, storage, employee wardrobe, 
and in the processing and packaging environment. It 
is important to understand that cleaning procedures 
targeting microbial hazards may not be adequate 
for allergen removal and therefore a processor 
will need to assess the adequacy of their cleaning 
and sanitation program(s) to ensure it is effective 
to remove allergens and prevent allergen cross-
contact. This appendix has been created to assist 
a processor in developing a sanitation program 
and/or assess their current program to determine 
its adequacy and efficacy. The development and 
oversight of cleaning and sanitation controls require 
an understanding of allergens and the health hazard 
they present in addition to effective methods for 
cleaning and sanitation.
An effective sanitation program includes procedures, 
practices, and processes to ensure a facility 
is maintained in a condition that significantly 
minimizes or prevents the hazard of allergen cross-
contact. The sanitation program should implement 
procedures and monitoring for the following: 
•	 Cleanliness of food-contact surfaces, including 
food-contact surfaces of utensils, staff wardrobe, 
and equipment; and
•	 Employees overseeing this program should 
possess an understanding of the allergen hazard 
and the principles for control of cross-contact 
that are required to execute the program. 
The following recommendations do not apply to 
every type of processor and situation. FDA has 
identified these recommendations as a means of 
assisting processors as foundational information for 
them to better understand and evaluate or create 
a cleaning and sanitization program based on the 
needs of their facility. These recommendations 
and considerations will assist a processor create 
and implement an effective cleaning and sanitation 
program for the control of allergens. FDA does not 
legally require processors to adopt the following 
sanitation and cleaning recommendations for 
the control of allergens. However, these recom-
mendations and considerations will assist the 
processor comply with the regulatory requirements 
of the seafood HACCP regulation.
CLEANING CONTROLS FOR ALLERGENS.
A processor that uses allergenic ingredients should 
evaluate the risk of allergen cross-contact and 
implement cleaning methods that effectively prevent 
or eliminate allergen cross-contact when necessary. 
The cleaning methods should be appropriate for the 
processing environment, the equipment, the type 
of product/ingredient, and the identified allergen. 
The development and oversight of the cleaning 
methods may also require technical expertise in 
the characteristics of food allergens, types of food 
contact surfaces, additional cleaning procedures, 
and/or specific cleaning chemicals, in addition to 
routine cleaning protocols.
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
A10 - 1 (August 2019)
Development of written sanitation  standard 
operating procedures (SSOPs) for allergen 
management is a helpful tool that can ensure the 
desired results and a consistent application of 
controls. Written procedures to include:
•	 All instructions necessary to ensure that 
equipment and utensils are effectively cleaned 
and sanitized along with instructions for 
monitoring of cleaning procedures and verifying 
cleanliness, including:
o Identify what is intended to be cleaned 
(e.g., processing and transport equipment, 
utensil, food contact surface); 
o Define a frequency of cleaning specific to the 
removal of targeted allergenic food residues. 
This frequency may vary dependent upon 
processing schedules, the type of equipment 
used, products produced, and the allergens 
involved. The frequency should consider 
risk of cross-contact and be consistent 
with cGMPs;  
o Provide detailed instructions on equipment 
breakdown for cleaning, if appropriate; 
o Define specific protocols, chemicals, 
concentrations, temperature set-points, 
solution flow rates, or any other factors 
that are critical to the effectiveness of the 
cleaning process. Cleaning treatments 
should be appropriate for their specific 
use and that directly apply to the products 
and processes in the facility. For example, 
cleaning treatments required for removing 
allergenic food pastes are different from 
cleaning treatments required for removing 
allergenic foods that are in a liquid form. 
The methods should be based on validation 
studies that are either conducted by the 
processor or by outside agents (e.g., 
chemical or equipment manufacturer, 
scientific study);
o Require use of freshly prepared cleaning 
solutions rather than reuse of cleaning 
solutions whenever possible. Reused 
cleaning solutions may not be effective at 
removing allergenic food residues and may 
also cause recontamination of surfaces with 
allergenic food residues. Reuse of cleaning 
solutions should be limited, however, if re-
used cleaning solutions are used, then their 
effectiveness in allergen removal should 
be verified;
o Establish written verification procedures, 
when appropriate; 
o Conduct verification testing using analytical 
methods (e.g., allergen-specific enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits; 
lateral flow devices (LFD) or dipsticks; 
protein swabs; adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) swabs (or general protein swabs); or 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods). 
Examples of use included:
	 Consider using qualitative ELISA testing 
of cleaned surfaces in combination with 
quantitative ELISA testing of finished 
product to validate allergen cleaning 
procedures;  
	 ATP swabs can be used during ongoing 
verification of cleaning when they have 
been documented to function adequately 
for this purpose during the validation 
process. It is not recommended to use 
ATP swabs alone for allergen cleaning 
verification since ATP is present in most 
foods and is not a specific indicator for 
allergens;
	
Consider using these analytical methods 
on both the equipment and the rinse 
water to verify the removal of allergens 
if the facility utilizes clean-in-place (CIP) 
protocols;
	 When a product contains two or more 
allergens, validation procedures using 
analytical techniques should focus on 
the highest percent allergen within the 
formula or other considerations, such 
as allergens that are the most difficult 
to remove from the food processing 
environment;  
	 Validate the efficacy of the analytical 
method(s) using a competent or 
accredited laboratory or trained 
personnel.
o Ensure that the cleaning practices and 
procedures do not result in transfer of 
allergens to other areas of the facility and 
prevent the dispersal of allergenic materials 
during the cleaning process:
A10 - 2 (August 2019)
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
	 Describe protocols for segregating, 
isolating and holding dirty equipment 
awaiting cleaning;
	 Protect the clean equipment and clean 
areas from recontamination from 
allergenic materials;
	 Prevent cleaned equipment from contact 
with overspray during cleaning of floors, 
walls, ceiling or other equipment;
	 Use vacuums equipped with filters 
designed to capture allergenic particles 
to remove loose, dry particles from 
surfaces. Other cleaning methods may 
be needed to remove residues not 
removed with a vacuum cleaning step;
	 Avoid the use of compressed air and 
grit blasting for removing food residue 
from difficult-to-clean areas or protect 
other equipment or areas from allergenic 
materials during cleaning. Compressed 
air and grit blasting can disperse 
allergens from one area to another;
	 When overspray from a high-pressure 
water hose affects nearby food contact 
surfaces procedures should be in place 
to ensure affected food contact surfaces 
are adequately cleaned to prevent 
allergen cross-contact. Another option 
would be to avoid using high pressure 
water hoses that could spread and 
aerosolize allergenic materials during 
cleaning or protect other equipment or 
areas from allergenic materials during 
cleaning.
•	
Establish written validation procedures when 
necessary to ensure that cleaning methods are 
effective at removing allergenic food residue. 
They may include how to conduct visual 
examinations, identify testing methods, and 
frequency of verification.  Visual monitoring 
should be conducted when equipment is still 
disassembled after cleaning. This applies to 
products where single or multiple allergens are 
utilized on the same processing equipment (e.g., 
fish, milk, wheat, eggs, tree nuts, peanuts, 
and/or soy in hot filled (soups), shrimp and 
French fries cooked in same oil fryolators; and 
batter/breading equipment of fish or non-fish 
products): 
o Conduct validation studies of the 
effectiveness of using “push-through” 
methods to clean food-contact surfaces to 
establish the critical factors for the process. 
Push-through methods are used when the 
processor pushes finished product (e.g., 
specific quantity of finished product from 
the following product cycle), salt, flour 
or other material through the processing 
line as a method to remove the allergens. 
Determine the amount of time or volume of 
material needed to purge all allergenic food 
from each piece of equipment cleaned with 
a “push-though” treatment to ensure that 
all equipment surfaces are “allergen clean”;
o Use CIP systems to clean processing 
equipment with validated protocols that 
have been examined for their effectiveness. 
CIP systems are beneficial because 
cleaning is automated and can be applied 
consistently once procedures are validated 
and monitored accordingly;
o Validation of cleaning procedures should 
occur: at least annually; when introducing a 
new product(s) or allergenic ingredient(s); 
when introducing or implementing new 
cleaning procedures, equipment, or 
chemicals; or when modifying (reducing) 
cleaning frequencies.
SAMPLING PLAN IN SUPPORT OF VERIFI-
CATION AND/OR VALIDATION ACTIVITIES.
Obtaining and analyzing samples from hand-held 
tools, employee apparel (e.g., aprons and gloves), 
equipment surfaces, rinse water, push-through 
material, ingredients and final product for the 
presence of allergenic food residue can help support 
and verify processor’s sanitation control program.
Consider the following:
•	 Establish sampling procedures, which includes 
the identity of the allergen, the type of sample 
(e.g. ingredient, equipment surface, push-
through material and/or rinse water), the 
amount of sample to take at each location, and 
the collection method (e.g. swab or container). 
•	 Predetermine the locations for sampling on 
equipment surfaces taking into consideration 
areas that can be considered potentially food 
contact or directly impact food contact surfaces 
and are difficult to clean.  
A10 - 3 (August 2019)
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
•	 Develop a valid sampling plan to accurately 
represent the condition of what is being sampled 
and the outcome of the cleaning and sanitation 
procedures for all pieces of equipment.
•	 Ensure that the sampling plan includes all 
the equipment where allergen build-up could 
occur, or residual allergenic proteins could 
be trapped [e.g., pneumatic lines (product 
contact) conveyor belts, fillers, mixers, silos, 
bulk tanks, packaging equipment, hand utensils, 
shovels, scrapers, aprons, and gloves]. The 
identification of equipment should be based 
on the processor’s practices and allergenic 
ingredients.
•	 Obtain equipment pre- and post-cleaning swabs 
at multiple locations on each processing line. 
Swabs obtained pre-cleaning serve as positive 
control samples. When multiple lines are used, 
sample all lines for presence of allergenic food 
residue pre- and post-cleaning. 
•	 Obtain push-through samples at multiple 
locations in the processing line. When multiple 
lines are used, obtain push-through samples 
for all processing lines.  
•	 Use validated analytical testing procedures that 
are specific to the targeted allergen(s) and 
the type or matrix of sample(s) to be tested. 
Monitor analytical test kits to ensure they have 
not expired.
•	 Ensure that the proper control samples are 
used in all analyses and that the analytical 
method demonstrates an acceptable sensitivity, 
specificity, and reproducibility for detection of 
the targeted allergen. 
•	
Define the final criteria for acceptance of 
analytical results.
•	 Establish and implement a training program for 
personnel who will collect samples and perform 
the analyses.  
•	 Periodically, verify in-house testing by using 
an independent laboratory.
•	
Establish and implement corrective actions that 
address finished products that were affected by 
potential cross-contact conditions and correct 
the condition to prevent recurrences of the 
deviation (e.g., evaluating cleaning methods, 
conducting validation studies, re-training staff, 
and/or modifying operating procedures.)
A10 - 4 (August 2019)
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
We have placed the following references on display in the Division of Dockets Management, Food and 
Drug Administration, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD 20852. The documents are available 
at that location between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.  As of July 2018, FDA had verified 
the Web site address for the references it makes available as hyperlinks from the Internet copy of this 
guidance, but FDA is not responsible for any subsequent changes to Non-FDA Web site references after 
July 2018. 
•	 Deibel, K., T. Trautman, T. DeBoom, W. Sveum, G. Dunaif, V. Scott, and D.Bernard. 1997. A 
Comprehensive Approach to Reducing the Risk of Allergens in Foods. Journal of Food Protection, 
60: 436-441.
•	 Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, and University of Nebraska. 2009. Components of 
an effective allergen control plan: A framework for food processors.  
•	 Fu, T., L. Jackson, K. Krishnamurthy, and W. Bedale. Food Allergens: Best Practices for Assessing, 
Managing and Communicating the Risks. Food Microbiology and Food Safety. Springer
•	 Jackson, L., R. Al-Taher, M. Moorman, J. DeVries, R. Tippett, K. Swanson, T. Fu, R. Salter, G. Nunaif, 
S. Estes, S. Albillos and S. Gendel. 2008. Cleaning and Other Control and Validation Strategies 
to Prevent Allergen Cross-Contact in Food-Processing Operations. Journal of Food Protection. 71: 
445-458.
•	 Stone, W., and K. Stevenson.  2009.  Managing Allergens in Food Processing Establishments 4
th 
Edition. Grocery Manufacturers Association.
A10 - 5 (August 2019)
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
NOTES:
Appendix 10: Cleaning and Sanitation for the Control of Allergens
A10 - 6 (August 2019)


