Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
PRINCIPLES OF PRESERVATION OF SHELF-STABLE 
DRIED MEAT PRODUCTS 
 
In general, the term “shelf-stable product” refers to those products that do not 
require refrigeration or freezing for safety and acceptable organoleptic 
characteristics.  Most often, the products are stored at “room temperature” 
(ambient).  This shelf-stability also is often dependent upon the proper packaging 
to control oxidation and potential mold growth.  The shelf-life for these types of 
products is usually defined for acceptable quality, not safety because the safety 
has been addressed in the production process.  FSIS is concerned with product 
safety and not quality attributes, which are concerns of the establishment. 
 
The shelf-life of the product is defined as the time the specific product can be 
stored under specified conditions that retains organoleptic acceptability.  Shelf-
life is determined by two kinds of deterioration: microbiological (spoilage) and 
chemical (oxidation and physical). 
 
This chapter describes the principles of food preservation as they relate to dried 
meat products.  It will cover:  
 
1. the interaction of factors that affect shelf-stability; 
2. the relationship between drying, acidification, and heating; 
3. the minimum aw and pH values required for microbial growth; 
4. how additives affect shelf-stability; 
5. how moisture/protein ratio applies to these products; 
6. process validations for these products; and 
7. the critical process parameters for dried meat products. 
 
The objectives of this section are for you to be able to:  
 
1. Identify the relationship between, drying, acidification and heating in 
the production of shelf-stable products. 
2. Recognize how moisture/protein ratio relates to product water 
activity. 
3. Recognize that microbial thermal resistance will vary due to product 
characteristics. 
 
 
Shelf-stability and Hurdle Effect 
 
Shelf-stability is due to a combination of factors, otherwise known as the “hurdle 
effect”.  The interaction of these factors affects specific microorganisms and 
chemical reactions.  Controlling the various factors and interactions maximizes 
the total effect and achieves shelf-stability. 
 
 
156 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
Food preservation technologies usually are classified into three types. 
 
1. Prevention/ removal of contamination 
 e.g., decontamination of raw materials (steam treatment and organic acid 
washes of carcasses, irradiation of spices), aseptic processing 
2. Inactivation of microorganisms 
 e.g., heat (pasteurization, sterilization), high pressure processing 
3. Slowing or complete inhibition of microbial growth 
e.g., low temp, water activity, redox potential, pH, or preservatives 
 
For dried meat products, preservation is mostly due to the slowing or complete 
inhibition of growth, although inactivation of pathogens such as E. coli O157:H7 
is also involved.  The following are the most common factors relating to the 
safety/shelf-stability in dried meat products. 
 
• water activity (aw) 
• pH 
• time/temperature/relati ve humidity 
• salt/brine strength 
• microflora types 
 
Other factors, such as the following, can also be important in the safety/stability 
of certain products. 
 
• titratable acidity (% acid) 
• moisture content 
• packaging: modified atmosphere/vacuum  
• preservatives 
• hydrostatic pressure (high pressure processing) 
• spices and spice extracts 
 
With dried meat products, water activity probably is the most important factor 
contributing to shelf-stability over the total range of products. (If pathogens are 
still viable, the product is adulterated.) For the most common microorganisms 
associated with these products, the minimum water activity for growth is as 
follows. 
Campylobacter 0.98 E. coli O157:H7 0.95 
Pseudomonas 0.97 Listeria monocytogenes 0.92 
Clostridium botulinum 
(non-proteolytic) 
0.96 Some LAB 0.92 
C. botulinum (proteolytic) 0.93 Staphylococcus aureus 
(anaerobic) 
0.90 
Clostridium perfringens 0.93 S. aureus (aerobic) 0.86 
Most LAB 0.95 Aspergillus flavus 0.80 
Salmonellae 0.94   
 
157 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
The product pH is the second most important factor, particularly considering that 
many of these dried meat products are fermented to some extent, or exhibit 
some microbial activity to yield the final product characteristics.  Minimum pH 
values for growth for the relevant microorganisms are as follows. 
 
Clostridium perfringens    5.0 
Campylobacter     4 .9 
Clostridium botulinum (proteolytic)  4.6 
E. coli O157:H7     4.0-4.4 
Pseudomonas     4 .4 
Listeria monocytogenes    4.4 
Yersinia enterocolitica    4.2 
Staphylococcus aureus    4.0 
Salmonellae      3.8 
Most LAB      3.0-3.5 
Aspergillus flavus     2 .0 
 
Inhibition of microorganisms by pH depends on many factors, including the type 
of acid and the temperature.  The minimum pH for growth of E. coli O157:H7 is 
generally closer to 4.4, but it will survive well at lower pH values, especially if 
refrigerated. 
 
Microbiological minimum or maximum limits for growth are primarily due to 
temperature, water activity, pH and/or the presence of preservatives.  The limits 
of water activity and pH as shown above apply only when all other factors are 
optimal for growth of the specific microorganism.  In food materials, especially 
dried meats, the environmental conditions are hardly optimal and if more than 
one preservative effect  (i.e., hurdle) is present, the effects may be added 
together (synergistic), and may even be more effective than the two factors 
alone.  For example, in a dried fermented meat product, the competitiveness of 
commonly occurring microorganisms varies with storage temperature, water 
activity, pH, presence of additives (e.g., salt, nitrite) and lack of oxygen. 
 
The hurdle effect occurs when the combination of inhibitors is more restrictive 
than the individual inhibitors alone – a synergistic effect.  Often, the hurdle effect 
allows the use of lower levels of the individual inhibitors that can result in a more 
organoleptically acceptable product, e.g., dried meats can have a higher water 
activity with lower pH.  In other words, the meat product is more acceptable at 
the higher water activity (e.g., more tender), but normally this higher water 
activity would not give shelf-stability.  By lowering the pH, the combination of the 
final water activity and the pH results in a shelf-stable product. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
The most important hurdles in food preservation are. 
 
• high temperature 
• low temperature 
• reduced water activity 
• increased acidity 
• reduced redox potential 
• preservatives 
• competitive microflora 
 
For shelf-stable dried meats, the last five hurdles are of primary importance, 
since these products are not sterilized, often not pasteurized, and certainly not 
distributed frozen. 
 
The main objective in the formulation and processing of a shelf-stable, dried 
meat product is to arrive at a combination of hurdles that favor desirable 
microorganisms over undesirable microorganisms while also maintaining a 
consumer acceptable product. There are many combinations of hurdles that can 
achieve product stability.  Typical fermented sausages have been categorized as 
either “very perishable” (pH > 5.2; aw > 0.95), “perishable” (pH 5.2-5.0 or aw = 
0.95-0.91)) or “shelf-stable” (pH 5.2 and aw < 0.95 or only pH < 5.0 or only aw < 
0.91) according to their respective pH and aw, assuming typical levels of the 
other hurdles such as salt, curing agents, etc.   
 
 
►Fermented Sausages 
 
Fermented sausages demonstrate a lowering of product pH due to fermentation, 
followed by weight loss and decrease in water activity during drying.  These vary 
in their rate and extent depending upon the specific formulation and process. 
 
 
►Water Activity 
 
Water activity probably is the most important single factor for shelf-stability (as 
indicated by microbial stability) in most dried meats.  Water activity, expressed as 
aw, is the vapor pressure of the product divided by the vapor pressure of pure 
water.  Relative humidity measurement is expressed as aw x 100%. 
 
Water activity values in foods vary: fresh meats, fruits and vegetables, greater 
than 0.98; dried sausages and condensed milk, 0.85 – 0.93; honey and 
chocolate, less than 0.60.  For dried meats, semi-dry sausages exhibit aw values 
from 0.95-0.97 while dry sausages generally show values of 0.85 – 0.93.  Dried 
hams, coppa and beef jerky generally have aw values less than 0.88.  Pork rinds 
have aw values less than 0.30.  
 
159 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
 
When other environmental conditions are optimal, most microorganisms do not 
exhibit growth below 0.91 water activity, with a few relevant exceptions, notably 
the staphylococci and fungi.  Staphylococcus aureus, a common meat pathogen, 
can grow as low as 0.86 water activity depending upon the other growth 
conditions, particularly if oxygen is present.   
 
 
►Moisture/Protein Ratios  
 
Moisture/protein ratios – MPR – are commonly used in the U.S. to classify dried 
sausages and other meat products.  These ratios express the percent moisture 
divided by the percent protein.  Dried meat MPR values vary from 3.7:1.0 for 
Thuringer to as low as 0.75:1.0 for beef jerky.  These MPR values are currently 
FSIS labeling standards and are historical in nature, representing average values 
of a market basket survey of representative products exhibited at the time of 
initial classification for labeling.  Although the MPR values do indicate the degree 
of product drying, they are not necessarily indicative of microbial safety or 
stability, as is the case with aw values.   Nevertheless, FSIS, in its Food 
Standards and Labeling Policy Book, identifies criteria for a shelf-stable product 
based on MPR.  Shelf-stable dry sausage must have an MPR ≤ 1.9:1 and semi-
dry sausage must have an MPR ≤ 3.1:1 with a pH ≤ 5.0, or be commercially 
sterilized (unless another MPR is specified for a product).   
 
 
Formulation Ingredients Important for Shelf-Stability 
 
►Salt 
 
Salt (sodium chloride) is the most important ingredient used in the manufacture 
of dried meat products.  Salt exhibits many functions including suppressing 
microbial growth, reducing water activity, releasing salt soluble proteins, 
penetrating easily into meats enhancing cure penetration, flavor and showing a 
pro-oxidant effect.  The percent salt in a meat product is not as important as the 
brine strength.  The brine strength (sometimes referred to as water-phase salt) is 
the percent salt divided by the percent salt plus percent moisture in the same 
product.  In dried meats that are manufactured with an injected or immersed 
brine, the salometer reading expresses the strength or salt content in the brine.  
A 100 degree brine contains the maximum 26.3% salt and a 50 degree brine 
contains 13.15% salt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
►Nitrate (NO3
-) 
 
Potassium nitrate, or saltpeter, was the original curing agent and was generally 
added to the meat unintentionally as a contaminant in the salt.  This chemical is 
very stable and must be converted to nitrite to effect meat curing.  This 
conversion usually is done by specific microorganisms, including the Kocuria and 
staphylococci.  Originally, these microorganisms were also contaminants in the 
meat, other ingredients, and/or the processing environment.  Although today we 
realize that nitrite is the active curing ingredient and that it can be added directly 
to the meat, the use of nitrate salts (sodium or potassium) is still somewhat 
common, mainly in dried meat products.  The primary reason for its continued 
use is that residual nitrate in dried meats can serve as a “nitrite reservoir” in non-
cooked products and the conversion of nitrate to nitrite in meat processing is a 
slower process and can yield a deeper red cure color.  For the necessary nitrate 
reduction to nitrite, the specific microorganisms that produce nitrate reductase 
always must be present and active.  Nitrate is a restricted ingredient and its use 
is regulated by the relevant government agency in different countries. 
 
 
►Nitrite (NO2-) 
 
Sodium nitrite is the active curing ingredient for typical meat curing.  This is a 
highly reactive chemical that reacts with meat to produce nitric oxide (NO) which 
replaces the oxygen molecule in the meat pigment structure (heme) yielding the 
typical cured “pink” color when the meat product is heated.  Nitrite also functions 
for meat flavor, helps provide microbial stability and acts as a potent antioxidant.  
Because of the highly reactive nature and toxicity of the nitrite, it is usually first 
combined with a portion of the salt prior to meat addition and should never be 
added to anything other than salt prior to the addition to the meat.  
 
 
►Curing Accelerators  
 
Compounds such as sodium erythorbate, sodium ascorbate, ascorbic acid, 
sodium acid pyrophosphate, chemical acidulants, etc., are added to dried meats 
to enhance the curing reaction by either serving as a reducing agent, oxygen 
scavenger and/or reducing the product pH. 
 
 
►Meat Starter Cultures 
 
Microorganisms typically are active participants in the processing of dried meats.  
Specific starter cultures are added in the formulation to control the product 
microflora and function for safety and preservation, product consistency 
(fermentation, drying, texture), product color and/or product flavor.  Generally, the 
 
161 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
two types of starter cultures used for dried meats are the lactic acid 
microorganisms and the staphylococci and Kocuria (micrococci).  The presence 
of antibiotic residues in meat may inhibit growth of the starter culture, resulting in 
inadequate drop in pH. 
 
►Sugars (carbohydrates) 
 
The role of added sugars or carbohydrates in meat curing and drying often is 
underestimated.  Carbohydrates, or “sugars,” used in dried meat processing 
generally consists of dextrose, cane sugar/sucrose, brown sugar, corn syrup, 
lactose, honey, molasses, maltodextrins, starches, etc.  The added sugars 
function for flavor, reduce harshness of salt, lowering water activity, yield, and as 
a source of energy for functional and spoilage microorganisms.  Added sugar 
type and amounts are critical for fermented products to control fermentation and 
final product pH.  This is clearly demonstrated in pepperoni, whereby the added 
dextrose generally is limited to achieve a desired final pH without subsequent 
charring or burning when the pepperoni is cooked on a pizza.   
 
 
►Chemical Acidulants 
 
Chemical acidulants are specific acids that are added to some dried meat 
product formulations to lower pH for various functions, including flavor, shelf-
stability, color, and drying enhancement.  Typically, chemical acidulants are 
designed or chosen to “mimic” the action of the lactic acid microorganisms (i.e., 
biological fermentation), thus the specific chemical acidulant demonstrates a 
somewhat slower release than just adding the pure acid.  The slower release 
allows for some meat matrix formation prior to acidulation.  This is accomplished 
by either adding a cyclic compound (e.g., glucono-delta-lactone, GDL) and/or 
adding an encapsulated acid.  Chemical acidulants most often are utilized to 
replace the starter culture in a typical fermented dried product to eliminate the 
fermentation phase and, thus, shorten the process. 
 
 
►Oxidation Prevention Additives 
 
Oxidation is a major problem with dried meat products which adversely affects 
color and flavor.  Additives that retard oxidation are classified as either primary 
antioxidants or secondary antioxidants.  Primary antioxidants are either synthetic 
(BHA, BHT, TBHQ, etc.) or natural (rosemary extract, tocopherols, smoke, etc.).  
These primary antioxidants react with the free radicals generated in the fat 
oxidation process and “break” the chain reaction.  Secondary antioxidants act as 
oxygen scavengers, synergists, and/or curing accelerators to enhance the curing 
reaction.  These compounds include citric acid, ascorbic acid, ascorbates, 
erythorbates, phosphates, lactates, starter cultures, etc., and function to either 
“scavenge oxygen,” thereby removing it from the system; “chelate” (i.e., tie up) 
 
162 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
the catalysts that initiate oxidation; and/or create low redox potential/reducing 
conditions that enhance the curing reactions.  Many of these compounds can act 
in several ways to prevent oxidation.  Specific starter cultures contain the 
enzyme catalase that removes peroxides from the meat system (oxygen 
scavenger), promotes the curing reaction, and prevents rancidity development. 
 
The proper use of any antioxidants is critical to its effectiveness.  Usually a 
combination of primary and secondary antioxidants is employed for maximum 
effectiveness.  The specific antioxidant should be employed for a specific meat 
system based on any flavor attributes, solubility, type of fat, and type of oxidation.  
The respective antioxidant must be stable before and after addition to the meat 
system and the delivery system must be appropriate for the application (e.g., fat 
soluble for direct addition to sausage versus water dispersible/water soluble for 
use in injected brines and marinades).  Adding the antioxidant early in the 
processing is recommended for maximum efficacy as well as to achieve optimum 
distribution. 
 
 
►Preservatives 
 
Certain preservatives, particularly anti-mold agents, are commonly used in dried 
meats since mold can grow on almost any dried meat product that is not in an 
anaerobic pack.  Typical mold inhibitors used include potassium sorbate, propyl 
parabens, and cultured whey/cultured corn syrup/cultured dextrose.  These latter 
cultured products contain naturally produced proprionic acid and other organic 
acids that retard mold growth. 
 
 
►Packaging 
 
The packaging system for dried meats is very important for chemical and 
microbial shelf-stability.  Although most dried meats are shelf-stable with regard 
to food safety regardless of packaging (due to lower water activity, pH), the 
proper packaging prevents potential mold growth (that can increase the pH, and 
potentially allow growth of pathogens) and product oxidation that is undesirable 
organoleptically. Generally, the products are packaged under vacuum or 
modified atmosphere where the oxygen is eliminated.  In MAP (modified 
atmosphere packaged) products, the total elimination of oxygen often is 
accomplished through the use of oxygen scavengers, which are added in the 
packaging process, either in packets or incorporated into the film.  These 
scavengers remove any residual oxygen that may still be present after 
packaging. 
 
 
 
163 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
Critical Processing Stages for Shelf-Stability and Safety 
 
Most of the dried meat products rely on the interaction of several parameters to 
achieve stability and safety. Many steps are controlled, but only a few are truly 
critical. Generally the critical control points for fermented shelf-stable products 
are fermentation, heating and, sometimes, drying.  For non-fermented salt-cured 
products, the salting step is critical, and for dried products the drying step is 
critical.  For some products, such as freeze-dried products or bacon bits, a 
cooking step may also be critical. 
 
The main control points in the manufacture of most shelf-stable dried meats are 
primarily focused on the initial formulation stages where the ingredients are 
combined with the meat and subsequently processed.  The proper combinations 
of salt, cure, sugars, starter cultures, etc., for the respective product must be 
assured.  When using a starter culture, the receipt, storage, and preparation of 
this ingredient is essential to its function.  However, although these are important 
parameters to control, the critical control point is at the fermentation stage, where 
the rate of pH drop to 5.3 or below is critical to prevent growth and enterotoxin 
production by S. aureus.  The rate of pH drop can be expressed in “degree-
hours”.  If the critical pH is not reached in the specified time, there may have 
been an error in the formulation process or with the starter culture.   
 
This is the concept of degree-hours – the number of hours at a temperature 
above 60°F (the temperature at which staphylococcal growth effectively begins) 
multiplied by the number of degrees above that temperature.  A process is 
acceptable if the product reaches pH 5.3 within a certain number of degree-
hours.  Processes attaining a temperature less than 90°F before reaching pH 5.3 
are limited to 1200 degree-hours.  Processes reaching a temperature of 90°F-
100°F prior to reaching pH 5.3 are limited to 1000 degree-hours.  Processes 
exceeding 100°F before reaching pH 5.3 are limited to 900 degree hours.  For 
example, a product processed at a constant 80°F reaching pH 5.3 in 55 hours 
would meet the guideline of 1200 degree-hours, since 80°F-60°F=20°F and 20°F 
X 55 hours = 1100 degree-hours.  More information on this can be found in the 
American Meat Institute’s Good Manufacturing Practices for Fermented Dry and 
Semi-dry Sausage Products: http://www.amif.org/FactsandFigures/SAUSAGE.pdf. 
 
 
 
164 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
58
Receiving 
starter cultures 
and casings
Storage 
Receiving  
raw meat
Storage (cold)
Frozen-
Refrigerated
Tempering frozen 
meat
Receiving restricted 
non-meat food 
ingredients
Storage
Weigh of 
raw meat
Combination of ingredients and 
processing (Chopping, grinding, 
and mixing)
Stuffing
Slicing / Peeling
Preparation
Fermentation
Heating
Drying/ Ripening
Receiving  
unrestricted non meat 
food ingredients
Storage
Receiving 
packaging material
Packaging / Labeling
Finished product 
Storage (cold)
Shipping
Casings
Starter 
cultures
Weigh
Weigh
Critical Stages: Safety in 
Fermented Sausages
 
Note: This flow diagram is for teaching purposes only. 
 
For dried whole muscle meats, particularly dry cured products, the initial salt level 
and application to all exposed meat surfaces is the most critical point in the 
operation, along with holding the salted product at relatively low temperatures 
until the critical brine content is achieved uniformly.   
 
59
Receiving raw 
hams
Storage (cold) 
Frozen-
Refrigerated
Receiving 
additives
Storage 
Hams
Salting
Postsalting
Drying
Ripening
Shipping
Conditioning
Boning Slicing Cutting
Finished product
Packaging/Labeling
Finished product 
storage
Thawed hams
Boned hams
Receiving 
packaging 
materials
Storage 
Critical Stages: Safety in 
Dry Cured Hams
 
Note: This flow diagram is for teaching purposes only. 
 
165 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
Many dried meat products are not heated significantly following the fermentation 
and/or salting process prior to drying; however with the increased emphasis on 
food safety, many more dried products, particularly in the U.S., do have a 
significant “heat step” in the total process to assure lethality of high numbers of 
specific pathogens.  This step is usually critical to achieve inactivation of the 
pathogens of concern in the product, and thus would be a critical control point.  
Consequently, the heat resistance of the target microorganisms in specific 
environments is a factor in determining lethality.  Heat resistance is usually 
expressed as D-value, or the time to effect a 1-log or 90% reduction in the 
number of cells.  Microorganisms vary widely in heat sensitivity.  Sporeforming 
microorganisms are much more heat resistant than non-sporeformers, and Gram 
positive type microorganisms are generally more heat resistant than Gram 
negative types.  The physiological state (e.g., age, growth conditions) of the 
microbes also affects their heat resistance, as does whether the microorganism 
has been previously exposed to the specific environment and has “adapted” to 
the environment.  The heating medium or environment (such as the water 
activity, pH, fat content, brine strength, proteins, etc.) dramatically affects heat 
resistance.  In general, the lower the pH, the lower the heat resistance, while 
drying or lower water activity can increase heat resistance.  Most often, added 
preservatives lower heat resistance. 
 
The environment in dried meats can be highly variable, with many different 
formulations and processing variables.  In addition, the microflora varies 
considerably, especially if not using a starter culture.  Validation studies in 
specific products generally are required to assure food safety and product 
stability.  Published validation studies for a similar formulation and process can 
be acceptable, as long as the reference validation is equal to or less severe than 
the formulation and process to be validated.   
 
 
Dried Meat Process Validation 
 
Validation focuses on putting together scientific and technical information to 
demonstrate that the hazards of concern are properly controlled.  Dried meat 
process validation addresses lethality and stabilization “during the shelf-life of the 
product.”  Processors must assess which hazards are reasonably likely to occur 
for their product.  For most of the dried meat products, manufacturers will 
consider the pathogens Salmonella, S. aureus, L. monocytogenes and, in beef, 
E. coli O157:H7.  Pathogenic sporeformers such as C. botulinum and 
C. perfringens may also need to be addressed.  Depending on the product and 
the identified hazards, it may be necessary to validate that the process controls 
the pathogen.  Currently there is no required log reduction specified for 
Salmonella; a processor must provide documentation that this organism is 
controlled for the specific product/process.  Some processors choose to validate 
their processes for L. monocytogenes, which is generally considered to be more 
 
166 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
resistant than Salmonella.  Processors must validate a 5-log kill of 
E. coli O157:H7 for products containing beef.  For the most part, to achieve 5-log 
reduction, the product must be heated to some extent.  The heating effect is 
enhanced at lower pH; thus the final internal temperature does not have to be as 
high with a lower pH.  The number of organisms present is important, as well as 
their heat resistance.  Manufacturers should consider the degree of lethality for 
each organism of concern.  Because of the nature of the finished product (low 
aw) pathogenic sporeformers should not be a concern.  For dried meat products it 
may be desirable to conduct validation studies that demonstrate lack of growth of 
relevant pathogenic microorganisms if the product is contaminated after the 
lethality step.   
 
There are some validated processing parameters that have been published for 
dried meat products, including pepperoni, hard salami, Italian salami, summer 
sausage, Lebanon bologna, and country hams.  Validation studies have also 
been conducted to assess the survival of L. monocytogenes during storage of 
RTE meat products processed by drying, fermentation, and/or smoking (Ingham 
et al., 2004. J. Food Protect. 12: 2698-2702) to help small processors classify 
these products with respect to FSIS’ alternatives for L. monocytogenes control 
(e.g., to assess whether the processing techniques and product characteristics 
can serve as antimicrobial agents or processes or post-lethality treatments).  
 
 
►Examples of Validated Processes 
 
Because there are so many different combinations of variables that impact the 
safety and stability of these products, it can be difficult to develop validation 
studies that apply broadly.  A commonly used process that has been validated is 
to achieve a pH < 5.0, followed by a heat process to achieve 128°F (53.3°C) 
internal temperature for 1 hour. 
 
 
Summer Sausage (fermented, semi-dry sausage) 
 
A typical process/product validation for fermented summer sausage is as follows.  
The product is fermented with a starter culture at 110°F (43.3°C) until the pH is 
4.7 or lower, then cooked to 152°F (66.7°C) internal product temperature.  The 
characteristics of the vacuum packaged product are as follows. 
 
moisture 56.7% brine strength 5.5% 
m/p ratio 3.28 pH 4.4 
fat 21.2% Titratable Acidity 0.361 
salt 3.4% aw 0.964 
 
(Titratable acidity is a measure of the total amount of acid present.) 
 
 
167 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
The process validation demonstrated complete destruction under these 
processing parameters of high levels of Salmonella, Listeria monocytogenes, 
Staphylococcus aureus, and E. coli O157:H7.  Moreover there was no growth of 
the same microorganisms when inoculated at high levels post-lethality and stored 
at either refrigerated temperature or room temperature (the product was shown 
to be shelf-stable). 
 
 
Pepperoni 
 
Similar results have been observed in validation studies with pepperoni (a 
fermented, dry sausage) where the product is fermented with a starter culture at 
102°F (38.9°C) to a pH < 5.0, then subsequently heated to 128°F (53.3°C) for 1 
hour and dried to 68% final yield.  Final product characteristics are as follows. 
 
moisture 26.0% brine strength 15.58% 
m/p ratio 1.4 pH 4.7 
fat 46.0% aw 0.896 
salt 4.05%   
 
 
Country Ham 
 
A validated process for a typical dried whole muscle product, country ham, 
processed with salting for 49 days at 40°F (4.4°C), post-salting drying 20 days at 
85°F (29.4°C), and dried 129 days at 68-75.2°F (20-24°C) results in a final 
product with the following characteristics. 
 
salt 8.0% 
pH 5.5 (5.0-6.0 during process) 
aw 0.92 
 
 
Jerky Products 
 
In the past, many beef and other jerky products processors have relied upon the 
final moisture/protein ratio of 0.75 or below.  Recently published FSIS jerky 
processing guidelines emphasize the importance of relying upon water activity 
(aw) levels rather than moisture protein ratios as an indicator of final product 
safety and shelf stability. In addition the new guidelines emphasize the 
importance of including a humidity step at the beginning of the process.  The new 
guidelines also include several optional processing interventions that may be 
used to ensure lethality in lieu of a proprietary validated process. 
 
168 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
Workshop: Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat 
Products 
 
 
The following questions are short-answer, True/False or fill-in-the-blanks.  
Record the answer(s) you believe to be correct; some questions have more than 
one correct answer. 
 
 
1. Describe what is meant by the “hurdle effect”. 
 
 
 
 
2. When nitrate is used, it is converted to _____________ by 
microorganisms or a reducing agent. 
 
 
 
3. Products can be characterized by both water activity and moisture protein 
ratio.  Which of these measurements is relative to the safety of a food? 
 
 
 
4. Semi-dry sausages exhibit higher aw values (0.95-0.97) and dry sausages 
generally show lower aw values (0.85-0.93).   
 
True 
 False 
 
 
5. Higher water activity (aw) indicates more free water to support the growth 
of bacteria, yeast, and molds.  
 
True 
 False 
 
 
6. Water activity of a food is the same thing as moisture content. 
 
True 
 False 
 
 
 
169 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
Principles of Preservation of Shelf-Stable Dried Meat Products 
5/11/05 
 
 
7. When other environmental conditions are optimal, most microorganisms, 
with a few exceptions, do not exhibit growth below 0.91 water activity (aw). 
 
True 
 False 
 
 
8. For a food to have an extended shelf-life without relying on refrigerated 
storage, it is necessary to control either its acidity level (pH) or the level of 
water activity (aw) or a suitable combination of the two. 
 
True 
 False 
 
 
9. Percent salt is more important than brine strength in dried meat products. 
 
True 
 False 
 
 
10. D-value is defined as the time in minutes required to increase a microbial 
population by 1-log or 90% of initial value. 
 
True 
 False 
 
 
11. Aunt Eleanor’s Sausage company makes two types of fermented semi-dry 
sausage.  The formulation is the same, however the difference between 
the two is in the thickness of the sausage.  The diameter of the smaller 
sausage is 1½ inch and the larger sausage is 2½ inch.  Could you validate 
the processes using only one thickness?  Which thickness would you 
expect to take longer to reach the desired water activity levels?  Aunt 
Eleanor would like to reformulate the product using an encapsulated 
acidulant rather than a starter culture.  How might the production process 
change with this reformulation? 
 
 
 
170 
FSRE Shelf-Stable 
