
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -22 
Guide 3-B  Instructions for Marking the Food Establishment Inspection Report, 
Including Food Code References for Risk Factors/Interventions and Good Retail 
Practices 
Guide 3-B is intended to be used during inspections to ensure that observations of the 
provisions of the Code are not overlooked during the inspection and accurately 
recorded on the Food Code Establishment Inspection Report form.  
The major headings from the Food Establishment Inspection Report form are 
condensed in Guide 3-B into key word phrases to assist the person conducting 
inspections in locating the Food Code citation that corresponds to a given violation and 
recording inspectional observations. The risk designations (Priority
 (P), Priority 
Foundation (Pf) and Core (C)) have been added to each applicable code section for 
reference when recording observations in the inspection report. 
All references and code sections in these marking instructions are based on the 2009 Food Code and its 
Supplement.  
A. GENERAL MARKING INSTRUCTIONS 
Header Information 
Field Description 
Establishment Complete this section using the “usual/common name” or “Doing 
Business As” name of the business. This information should be the 
same as the license/permit application completed at the initiation of 
the business. 
Address Street address of the actual business location 
Zip Code Zip code of the actual business location 
Telephone Contact phone number for the establishment 
License/Permit # License number or tracking identification 
Permit Holder Name of Owner or Operator as shown on application 
Purpose The reason for the inspection – routine, re-inspection, complaint, or 
follow-up,etc.  
Est. Type Description or code for describing the type of facility (e.g. restaurant, 
market, vehicle, temporary food facility) 
Risk Category Designation of risk/priority level for determining frequency of 
inspection 
Number of Risk Factor / 
Intervention Violations 
The number of boxes marked OUT in items 1-29 should be counted 
and the total number placed here 
Number of Repeat Risk Factor / 
Intervention Violations 
The number of boxes marked R (repeat) in items 1-29 should be 
counted and the total number placed here  
Score (optional) A score is optional for this form. If a jurisdiction has a scoring system, 
it should be incorporated into the inspection form and the score of an 
inspection placed here. 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -23 
Field Description 
Date The date of the inspection including month, day, and year 
Time In The actual time the inspection begins 
Time Out The actual time the inspection ends 
 
B. RISK FACTORS AND INTERVENTIONS 
Risk factors are food preparation practices and employee behaviors most commonly reported to the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as contributing factors in foodborne illness outbreaks. 
Risk factors include: Food from Unsafe Sources, Improper Holding Temperatures, Inadequate Cooking, 
Contaminated Equipment, and Poor Personal Hygiene. These items are prominent on the Food 
Establishment Inspection Report because maintaining these items in compliance is vital to preventing 
foodborne illness. Additionally, five key public health interventions were introduced in the 1993 Food 
Code that supplemented the other interventions long-established by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) model codes and guidances to protect consumer health. The five key interventions are: 
Demonstration of Knowledge, Employee Health Controls, Controlling Hands as a Vehicle of 
Contamination, Time and Temperature Parameters for Controlling Pathogens, and the Consumer 
Advisory.  
For each item on the inspection report form in the Foodborne Illness Risk Factors and Public Health 
Interventions section, the inspector should indicate one of the following for COMPLIANCE STATUS: “IN” 
which means that the item is in compliance; “OUT” which means that the item is not in compliance; 
“N.O.” which means that the item was not observed during the inspection; or “N.A.” which means that 
the item is not applicable for the facility. If N.A. or N.O. is not listed as an option for a particular item, this 
means that this item must be evaluated during the inspection and a compliance status must be 
determined. If the item is marked “OUT”, document details of each violation for the item number in 
the “Observations and Corrective Actions” section on the second page of the inspection report. 
Compliance status should be determined as a result of observations that establish a pattern of non-
compliance. Consideration should be given to the seriousness of the observation with regard to 
prevention of foodborne illness. 
For items marked “OUT,” further indicate the status of the violation by marking an “X” in the 
corresponding box for Corrected On-Site (COS) during the inspection and/or Repeat violation (R). 
Marking COS indicates that all violations cited under that particular item number have been corrected and 
verified before completing the inspection. The actual corrective action taken for each violation should be 
documented in the “Observations and Corrective Actions” section of the inspection report. For example, 
Item #10 Handwashing sink is marked out of compliance because the establishment does not have soap 
and paper towels at the handwashing sink. The person in charge partially corrects the problem by putting 
soap at the sink, but does not replace the paper towels or provide any other effective means for drying 
hands. The corrective action taken for the soap is documented in the narrative on the form, but COS is 
not marked for Item #10 because all violations under that item were not corrected. Marking R indicates 
that the same violation under a particular item number was cited on the last inspection report. Using the 
same scenario, on the subsequent inspection if the provision of soap and paper towels is not in violation, 
but employees are not washing hands in the correct sink (which is also cited under Item #8 Handwashing 
sink), R would not be marked because this is a new violation which was not cited on the previous 
inspection report. 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -24 
C. Marking Instructions for each RISK FACTOR AND INTERVENTION on the 
Inspection Report 
Supervision 
1. PIC present, demonstrates knowledge, and performs duties 
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance. The person in charge (PIC) has three 
assigned responsibilities – Presence; Demonstration of Knowledge; and Duties. This item is 
marked OUT of compliance if any one of the responsibilities is not met.  
A. Person in charge is present. This item is marked OUT of compliance if there is no PIC 
per 2-101.11(A) and (B).  
B. Demonstration of Knowledge. The PIC has three options for demonstrating knowledge. 
This item is marked IN compliance if the PIC meets at least one of the options. The three 
options for demonstration of knowledge allowed by the Food Code are: 
1. Certification by an ACCREDITED PROGRAM as specified in 2-102-20.  
2. Complying with this Code by having no violations of priority items during the current 
inspection; or 
3. Correct responses to the inspector's questions regarding public health practices and 
principles applicable to the operation. The inspector should assess this item by 
asking open-ended questions that would evaluate the PIC's knowledge in each of the 
areas enumerated in ¶ 2-102.11(C)(1), (4)-(16). Questions can be asked during the 
initial interview, menu review, or throughout the inspection as appropriate. The 
Inspector should ask a sufficient number of questions to enable the inspector to make 
an informed decision concerning the PIC's knowledge of the Code requirements and 
public health principles as they apply to the operation. The dialogue should be 
extensive enough to reveal whether or not that person is enabled by a clear 
understanding of the Code and its public health principles to follow sound food safety 
practices and to produce foods that are safe, wholesome, unadulterated, and 
accurately represented.  
C. Duties of the PIC. This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on the 
interaction and observation with the PIC and food employee. The inspector needs to 
determine the systems or controls the PIC has put into practice regarding oversight 
and/or routine monitoring of the Duties listed in § 2-103.11. This is accomplished by 1) 
discussion with the PIC, and 2) verified through observation that the systems or controls 
are actually being implemented. This concept is commonly referred to as Active 
Managerial Control. This item must be marked OUT of compliance when there is a 
pattern of non-compliance and obvious failure by the PIC to ensure employees are 
complying with the duties listed in § 2-103.11. Since marking this item out of compliance 
requires judgment, it is important that this item not be marked for an isolated incident, but 
rather for an overall evaluation of the PIC's ability to ensure compliance with the duties 
described in § 2-103.11. 
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. if the establishment is deemed by the Regulatory Authority to not 
apply due to the minimal risk of causing, or contributing to foodborne illness based on the nature 
of the operation and extent of the food operation. 
N.O.   Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -25 
Applicable Code Section:  
2-101.11  Assignment (Pf) 
2-102.11(A), B) and (C)(1), (4)-(16)   Demonstration (Pf) 
2-103.11 (A)-(O) and (Q)   Person-In-Charge-Duties (Pf) 
 
2. Certified Food Protection Manager 
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item is marked IN compliance 
when it is observed that the person in charge is a certified food protection manager. This 
item is marked OUT when it is observed that there is no person in charge that is deemed 
a certified food protection manager or the certified food protection manager certificate is 
deemed not to be from an accredited program.  
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. if the establishment is deemed by the Regulatory Authority 
to not apply due to the minimal risk of causing, or contributing to foodborne illness based 
on the nature of the operation and extent of food operation.  
N.O. Do NOT MARK this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Section: 
2-102.12(A)  Certified Food Protection Manager (C) 
 
Employee Health/Responding to Contamination Events 
 
3. Management and food employee knowledge, and conditional employee; responsibilities and  
reporting.  
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item is marked IN compliance when 
the following criteria are met:  
1. The PIC is aware of his or her responsibility to inform food employees and conditional employees 
of their responsibility to report certain symptoms or diagnosed diseases to the person in charge 
and for the PIC to report to the regulatory authority as specified under Food Code ¶ 2-103.11 (O) 
and ¶¶ 2-201.11 (A),(B), (C), and (E); and 
2. The PIC provides documentation or otherwise satisfactorily demonstrates during the inspection, 
that all food employees and conditional employees are informed of their responsibility to report to 
management information about their health and activities as it relates to diseases that are 
transmissible through food, as specified under ¶ 2-201.11(A). Satisfactory compliance may be 
documented by completion of Form 1-B, Conditional Employees or Food Employees Reporting 
Agreement, in Annex 7 of the 2009 Food Code for each employee or other similar State or local 
form containing the same information; or 
3. In lieu of Form 1-B, compliance may be demonstrated by:  
a) Presenting evidence such as a curriculum and attendance rosters documenting that each 
employee has completed a training program which includes all the information required 
on Form 1-B regarding their reporting responsibilities; or 
b) Implementation of an employee health policy which includes a system of employee 
notification using a combination of training, signs, pocket cards, or other means to convey 
all of the required information on Form 1-B to all food employees and conditional 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -26 
employees. A signed acknowledgement by the employee should be part of any employee 
health policy.  
The regulatory authority is encouraged to establish a policy of selecting one employee at random 
during each inspection and requesting the PIC verify, by one of the previously listed methods, 
that the selected employee has been informed of his or her responsibility to report symptoms, 
exposures, and diagnosed illnesses to management. The PIC is not expected to quote symptoms 
and diseases from memory, but should be able to locate that information on Form 1-B or similar 
documents used to demonstrate compliance.  
Additional information is provided in Annex 3 of the Public Health Reasons for Subpart 2-201, 
including a number of questions, which may be used as a reference to assist the regulatory 
authority in determining compliance with this item.   
N.A.  Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections:  
2-102.11(C)(2),(3) and (17)  Demonstration (Pf) 
2-103.11 (P)    Person in Charge-Duties (Pf) 
2-201.11(A), (B), (C), & (E)  Responsibility of Permit Holder, Person in Charge, and 
Conditional Employees (P,Pf)  
 
4. Proper use of restriction and exclusion  
IN/OUT  This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance. Compliance must be based on first hand 
observations or information and cannot be based solely on responses from the PIC to 
questions regarding hypothetical situations or knowledge of the Food Code. This item is 
marked IN when the following criteria are observed at the time of the inspection:  
•  There are no ill employees.  
• There are no employees experiencing symptoms with or without a diagnosis that 
require reporting, or reason for the PIC to exclude or restrict an employee  
•  A food employee who works in a food establishment serving a HSP or non-HSP, is 
restricted due to diagnoses with an infection from nontyphoidal Salmonella and is 
asymptomatic 
 This item should be marked OUT of compliance when: 
• The inspector observes a working employee with specific reportable symptoms 
(subparagraph 2-201.11 (A)(1)); or 
• The inspector becomes aware that an employee has reported information about his 
or her health and activities as it relates to diseases that are transmissible through 
food and the PIC has not acted to restrict/exclude an employee as required by the 
Food Code (§2-201.12 & §2-201.13); or 
• The inspector becomes aware that the PIC has not notified the Regulatory Authority 
that an employee is jaundiced or diagnosed with an illness due to a pathogen as 
specified under subparagraphs 2-201.11 (A)(2)(a)-(f) of the Food Code. 
• There are food employees working in the food establishment that have been 
diagnosed with an illness as specified in paragraphs 2-201.11(A)(2-5); Additionally, in 
food establishments exclusively serving a highly susceptible population, there are to 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -27 
be no food employees with an active sore throat with a fever working in the food 
establishment. 
 
N.A. Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O. Do Not Mark this item N.O.  
 
Applicable Code Sections:  
2-201.11 (D) and (F)  Responsibility of Permit Holder, Person in Charge, and Conditional 
Employees Responsibility of the PIC to Exclude or Restrict 
(P,) 
2-201.12  Exclusions & Restrictions (P) 
2-201.13  Removal, Adjustment, or Retention of Exclusions & Restrictions (P) 
 
5. Clean-up of Vomiting and Diarrheal Events 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This items is marked IN compliance 
when it is demonstrated that the food establishment has written procedures available for 
employees to follow when responding to vomiting or diarrheal events that involve the 
discharge of vomitus or fecal matter onto surfaces in the food establishment. Refer to the 
Public Health Reasons (§2-501.11 Clean up of Vomiting and Diarrheal Events) for suggested 
recommendations as to what the food establishment can include within their plan (this is not 
an exhaustive list). 
This item is marked OUT of compliance if the establishment does not demonstrate the ability 
to provide written procedures for employees to follow when responding to vomiting or diarrheal 
events that involve the discharge of vomitus or fecal matter onto surfaces in the food 
establishment. 
N.A. Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O. Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Section: 
2-501.11  Clean-up of Vomiting and Diarrheal Events 
(Pf) 
 
Good Hygienic Practices 
6. Proper eating, tasting, drinking, or tobacco products use 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations or 
discussions of the appropriate hygienic practices of food employees. This item should be 
marked IN compliance when a food employee is observed drinking from a closed beverage 
container subsequently stored on a non-food-contact surface and separate from exposed 
food, clean equipment, and unwrapped single- service and single-use articles. This item 
should be marked OUT of compliance when food employees are observed improperly tasting 
food, eating, drinking, or using tobacco products, or there is supporting evidence of these 
activities taking place in non-designated areas of the establishment. An open container of 
liquid in the kitchen preparation area does not necessarily constitute marking this item OUT. 
Further discussion with a food employee or the PIC may be needed to determine if the liquid, if 
labeled, is used as an ingredient in food, or may be an employee beverage that is consumed 
in another designated area. If the liquid is an open beverage that is consumed in a designated 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -28 
area, it must still be stored in a manner to prevent the contamination of food, equipment, 
utensils, linens and single-service/single-use articles.  
N.A.  Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  This item may be marked N.O. for retail operations only in the RARE case when there are no 
food workers present at the time of inspection. 
 
Applicable Code Sections:  
2-401.11  Eating, Drinking, or Using Tobacco Products (C)  
3-301.12  Preventing Contamination When Tasting (P) 
 
7. No discharge from eyes, nose, and mouth 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
employees. This item should be marked IN compliance when no food employees are observed 
having persistent sneezing, coughing, or a runny nose that causes discharge from the eyes, 
nose or mouth. This item should be marked OUT of compliance when a food employee has 
persistent sneezing, coughing, or a runny nose that causes discharges from the eyes, nose or 
mouth, subjecting food and food-contact surfaces to potential contamination.   
 
N.A.  Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  This item may be marked N.O. for retail operations only in the RARE case when there are no 
food workers present at the time of inspection. 
 
Applicable Code Sections:  
2-401.12 Discharges from the Eyes, Nose, and Mouth 
(C)  
Control of Hands as a Vehicle of Contamination 
8. Hands clean and properly washed 
IN/OUT   This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item is marked IN compliance only 
when employees are observed using proper handwashing techniques at appropriate times and 
places. Hands are not required to be washed between each change of gloves, if it is observed 
that there was no change in the task being performed and no activities which could potentially 
result in cross contamination. 
N.A.  Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.   This item may be marked N.O. for retail operations only in the RARE case when there are no 
food workers present at the time of inspection. (If there are no food workers present, but the 
PIC accompanies the inspector on the inspection and touches food, clean equipment, or 
utensils without washing his/her hands, this item is marked OUT.) 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -29 
Applicable Code Sections:   
2-301.11  Clean condition-Hands and Arms (P) 
2-301.12  Cleaning Procedure (P) 
2-301.14  When to Wash (P) 
2-301.15  Where to Wash (Pf) 
2-301.16 Hand Antiseptics (Pf) 
 
 9.  No bare hand contact with RTE foods or a pre-approved alternate properly followed 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item is marked IN compliance only when food 
employees are observed using suitable utensils or gloves to prevent bare hand (or arm) contact with 
ready-to-eat foods or if the food employee contacts exposed RTE food with bare hands at the time the 
RTE food is being added as an ingredient to a food that:  
• Contains a raw animal food and is to be cooked in the food establishment to heat all parts of the  
food to minimum temperatures specified in ¶¶3-401.11(A)-(B) or §3-401.12; or  
• Does not contain a raw animal food but is to be cooked in the food establishment to heat all parts  
of the food to a temperature of at least 63°C (145°F).  
This item is also marked IN compliance when food employees are observed properly following a pre-
approved alternative procedure to no bare hand contact.  
This item should be marked OUT of compliance if one food employee is observed ready-to-eat food with 
their bare hands in the absence of a prior approval and written procedures for bare hand contact. Refer 
to subparagraph 3-301.11 (E)(1)-(7) for a listing of conditions that must be met in order to receive prior 
approval by the Regulatory Authority. Bare hand contact by food employees serving a Highly Susceptible 
Population is prohibited and no alternative to bare hand contact is allowed. This item is also marked OUT 
when food employees contact exposed RTE food with bare hands that is to be added as ingredients to a 
food that is not properly heat treated as specified in Sub-¶3-301.11(D)(1)-(2).  
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. for establishments that provide only packaged, or bulk food items that are 
not ready-to-eat.  
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. for establishments that prepare ready-to-eat foods only, but no food 
preparation is performed at the time of inspection. 
 
Applicable Code Sections:   
3-301.11 Preventing Contamination from Hands 
(P, Pf, C) 
3-801.11(D)  Pasteurized Foods, Prohibited Re-Service, and Prohibited Foods (P) 
 
10. Adequate handwashing sinks, properly supplied and accessible  
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on observations in determining that 
handwashing sinks are properly equipped and conveniently located for employee use in food 
preparation, food dispensing and warewashing areas as well as in or immediately adjacent to 
toilet rooms. This item must be marked OUT of compliance when the facility is not stocked 
with soap, hand drying provisions or equipped with the required signage. In addition, if the 
handwashing sink is not located to be available to employees who are working in a food 
preparation area, food dispensing and warewashing areas and is blocked by portable 
equipment or stacked full of soiled utensils or other items, or the facility is unavailable for 
regular employee use, this item must be marked OUT of compliance. 
 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -30 
N.A. Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O. Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections:   
5-202.12 Handwashing Sinks, Installation ((Pf, C)   
5-203.11 Handwashing Sinks-Numbers and Capacities (Pf) 
5-204.11 Handwashing Sinks-Location and Placement (Pf) 
5-205.11 Using a Handwashing Sink-Operation and Maintenance (Pf) 
6-301.11 Handwashing Cleanser, Availability (Pf) 
6-301.12 Hand Drying Provision (Pf) 
6-301.13 Handwashing Aids and Devices, Use Restrictions (C) 
6-301.14 Handwashing Signage (C) 
 
Food From a Source That Complies with Law 
11. Food obtained from sources that comply with Law  
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
products, food labels and packaging, water analyses, and discussion with the PIC or other 
food employees. This item should be marked IN compliance when the regulatory authority is 
able to determine food has been received from sources that comply with LAW. . A review of 
supplier names, shipment invoices, buyer specification plans, molluscan shellfish tags, proof 
of regulatory permit/licensure of a food source, etc. can be used to document approved food 
sources. Wild harvested mushrooms if sold or served have been approved by the regulatory 
authority. Milk and milk products must comply with Grade A Standards. This item should be 
marked OUT of compliance when it cannot be determined that food is received from a source 
that complies with LAW and if the regulatory authority did not approve the sale or service of 
wild harvested mushrooms and it is observed in the food establishment for sale and service. 
N.A.  Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-201.11  Compliance with Food Law (P, Pf, C) 
3-201.12  Food in a Hermetically Sealed Container (P) 
3-201.13  Fluid Milk and Milk Products (P) 
3-201.14  Fish (P) 
3-201.15  Molluscan Shellfish (P) 
3-201.16 Wild Mushrooms (P) 
3-201.17  Game Animals (P, C) 
3-202.13  Eggs (P) 
3-202.14  Eggs and Milk Products, Pasteurized (P) 
 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -31 
3-202.110 Juice Treated-Commercially Processed (P, Pf) 
5-101.13 Bottled Drinking Water (P) 
 
12. Food received at proper temperature  
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on actual food temperature 
measurements of TCS foods being received. This item should be marked IN compliance when 
food is received and found at proper temperatures during the inspection (i.e. catered meal for 
child care center arrives during the inspection and the regulatory authority verifies receiving 
temperature). This item should be marked OUT of compliance if food is received and 
accepted, but an actual food temperature measurement of a TCS food by the regulatory 
authority at the time of delivery exceeds the temperature specifications for receiving as 
prescribed by the Code. 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. for retail operations when the establishment receives only 
foods that are not TCS food and that are not frozen. 
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. if food is not received during the inspection. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-202.11  Temperature (P, Pf) 
 
13. Food in good condition, safe and unadulterated 
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of the 
integrity of product packaging, wholesomeness, and signs of adulteration. This item must be 
marked IN compliance when a dent in a canned food has not compromised the hermetic seal; 
cuts made in outer cardboard packaging during opening of the case do not enter the inner 
product packaging; the true appearance, color, or quality of a food is not misrepresented; and 
food is honestly presented. This item must be marked OUT of compliance when the integrity of 
food packaging has been compromised or the true appearance, color, or quality of a food has 
been intentionally altered. 
N.A. Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-101.11  Safe, Unadulterated and Honestly Presented 
(P) 
3-202.15 Package Integrity (Pf) 
 
14. Required records available: molluscan shellfish identification, parasite destruction 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of fish in 
storage, molluscan shellfish identification, and/or records of freezing of fish for parasite 
destruction. This item should be marked IN compliance if the permit holder provides a 
statement from supplier(s) identifying that fish sold as raw, raw-marinated or undercooked is 
frozen by supplier for parasite destruction; or there are freeze records maintained by the 
permit holder when fish are frozen for parasite destruction on the premises. This item should 
be marked OUT of compliance if there are no molluscan shellfish identification, when the 
molluscan shellfish identification are incomplete, when there is evidence of commingling, or 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -32 
when no records of freezing of fish for parasite destruction are available. Fish exempt from 
freezing requirements are found in paragraph 3-402.11(B). 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. when molluscan shellifsh are not used in the establishment and 
the only fish sold as raw, raw-marinated or undercooked is the tuna species or aquacultured 
fish listed as exempted from freezing in the Food Code.  
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. when molluscan shellfish or raw, raw-marinated and 
undercooked fish are sold periodically in the establishment, but are not being sold at the time 
of inspection and prior compliance through tags, invoices, or purchase records cannot be 
verified. 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-202.18  Molluscan Shellfish, Packaging and Identification (Pf, C) 
3-203.12  Molluscan Shellfish, Maintaining Identification (Pf) 
3-402.11  Parasite Destruction (P, C) 
3-402.12 Records, Creation, & Retention (Pf) 
  
Protection from Contamination 
15. Food separated and protected 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
storage and food handling practices. This item should be marked OUT of compliance when 
ready-to-eat foods are subject to potential contamination by raw animal foods; raw animal 
foods are observed not separated by type based on minimum cook temperatures by 
spacing or placing in separate containers; unpackaged comminuted or otherwise non intact 
meats are stored above unpackaged whole muscle intact cuts of meat; food is not packaged 
or covered during storage (unless in the process of cooling); or food is in contact with soiled 
equipment and utensils; or single-use gloves used for more than one task. An exception is 
included that allows the following: storage and display of frozen, commercially packaged 
raw animal food adjacent to or above frozen, commercially packaged ready-to-eat food and 
combining raw animal foods with ready-to-eat foods when combined as ingredients for 
future preparation or cooking. 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. when there are no raw animal foods used in the facility and 
only prepackaged foods are sold. 
N.O. This item is marked N.O. when raw animal foods are used or served seasonally and you are 
unable to determine compliance. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-302.11  Packaged and Unpackaged Food-Separation, Packaging, and Segregation 
(P, C) 
3-304.11 Food Contact with Equipment, Utensils, and Linens (P) 
3-304.15(A) Gloves, Use Limitation (P) 
3-306.13(A) Consumer Self-Service Operations (P) 
 
16. Food-contact surfaces: cleaned and sanitized 
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food-
contact surfaces of equipment and utensils; actual measurements/readings of chemical 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -33 
sanitizer concentration, hot water sanitizing temperature, pH, hardness, water pressure, etc. 
using test strips, heat-sensitive tapes, and equipment gauges; observations of cleaning and 
sanitizing procedures; and discussion of cleaning and sanitizing procedures and frequency 
with the PIC or other food employees. This item must be marked IN compliance when manual 
and/or mechanical methods of cleaning and sanitizing are effective, and performed at the 
prescribed frequency. There should be an overall assessment of the food-contact surfaces of 
equipment and utensils in clean storage and in use to determine compliance. For example, 
this item is not marked OUT of compliance based on one visibly soiled utensil, such as a plate 
or knife. This item must be marked OUT of compliance when manual and/or mechanical 
methods of cleaning and sanitizing food-contact surfaces of equipment and utensils are 
ineffective, or if one multiuse piece of equipment such as a slicer or can opener is visibly 
soiled and being used at the time of the inspection. This item is also marked OUT if it is 
observed that equipment or utensils that have come into contact with a major food allergen 
such as fish was not cleaned and sanitized prior to use for other types of raw animal foods. 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. only when there is no requirement to clean equipment and 
utensils such as when only prepackaged foods are sold. 
N.O. Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-501.111 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures 
(P) 
4-501.112 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Hot Water Sanitization Temperatures (Pf) 
4-501.113 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Sanitization Pressure (C) 
 
4-501.114 Manual and Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization-Temperature, 
pH, Concentration and Hardness (P, Pf) 
4-501.115 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Chemical Sanitization Using Detergent-Sanitizers (C) 
4-601.11(A) Equipment, Food-Contact Surfaces, Nonfood-Contact Surfaces, and Utensils (Pf) 
4-602.11 Equipment Food-Contact Surfaces and Utensils-Frequency (P, C) 
4-602.12 Cooking and Baking Equipment (C) 
4-702.11 Before Use After Cleaning (P) 
4-703.11 Hot Water and Chemical-Methods (P) 
 
17. Proper disposition of returned, previously served, reconditioned, and unsafe food 
IN/OUT This item must be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item is marked OUT of compliance if 
food is found unsafe, adulterated, not honestly presented, from an unapproved source, or if 
ready-to-eat food is contaminated by employees and is not discarded or reconditioned 
according to an approved procedure, or if previously served unwrapped, unprotected food is 
observed being re-served. 
N.A. Do Not Mark this item N.A. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-306.14  Returned Food and Re-service of Food 
(P) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -34 
3-701.11  Discarding or Reconditioning Unsafe, Adulterated, or Contaminated Food (P) 
 
Time Temperature Control for Safety Food (TCS Food)  
18. Proper cooking time and temperatures 
NOTE: The cooking temperatures of foods must be measured to determine compliance or 
noncompliance. Do not rely upon discussions with managers or cooks to make a 
determination of compliance or noncompliance. The temperature of raw animal foods in each 
species cooked during the inspection should be taken. For instance, if the facility fries chicken, 
scrambles eggs, bakes fish, grills hamburgers, and slow-roasts prime rib during the inspection 
– the cook temperatures of all of the products should be measured and recorded. 
Temperatures, both IN compliance and OUT of compliance, should be recorded in the 
“Temperature Observations” section of the inspection report. If there is insufficient space for 
the number of temperatures taken, additional temperatures should be documented in the 
“Observations and Corrective Actions” section on the second page of the inspection report. 
The time of inspections should be varied so that cooking can be observed. 
 
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item should be marked OUT of 
compliance if the items checked do not meet the temperature requirements or manufacturer’s 
instructions for cooking and the employee doing the cooking attempts to serve the product 
without returning the product to the cooking process. If a food is cooked below the required 
temperature but the facility has an approved Consumer Advisory or an approved variance with 
HACCP plan for that food item, mark the item IN compliance, record the temperature and 
document the reason it is IN compliance. Foods cooked with a non-continuous cooking 
process are marked OUT of compliance if the food item does not meet the time/temperature 
requirements for cooking as specified in 3-401.11(A)-(C) and if written procedures describing 
how the foods are prepared and stored after initial heating but prior to cooking for sale or 
service are not available for review. In situations where food bears information from the 
manufacturer indicating that the food has not been processed to control pathogens, the food 
can be cooked to a time and temperature that has been commonly applied to that type of food 
(e.g., heating spiced apple cider to boiling). 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. when no raw animal foods are cooked in the establishment. 
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. when you are unable to determine the cooking temperature of 
any food. The inspection should be arranged at an optimum time for measuring at least one 
cooked item. 
 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -35 
Internal Cooking Temperature Specifications for Raw Animal Foods  
Internal Cooking 
Temperature Raw Animal Foods 
145°F for 15 seconds 
• Raw eggs cooked for immediate service 
• Fish, except as listed below 
• Intact Meat, except whole meat roasts* and whole-
muscle intact beef steak** 
• Commercially raised game animals, rabbits 
155°F for 17 seconds: 
• Ratites (Ostrich, Rhea and Emu) 
• Non-Intact Meats 
• Raw eggs not for immediate service 
• Comminuted fish, or commercially raised game animals 
165°F for <1 second 
(instantaneous): 
• Wild game animals 
• Poultry 
• Stuffed fish, meat, pork, pasta, ratites & poultry 
• Stuffing containing fish, meat, ratites & poultry 
* Whole Meat Roasts: Refer to cooking charts in the Food Code ¶ 3-401.11(B) 
** Whole-Muscle Intact Beef Steak: Refer to cooking cooking recommendations in the Food Code 
    ¶ 3-401.11(C) 
 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-401.11 Raw Animal Foods-Cooking 
(P, Pf) 
3-401.12 Microwave Cooking (P, C) 
3-401.14 Non-Continuous Cooking of Raw Animal Foods (P, Pf) 
3-401.15 Manufacturer Cooking Instructions (P) 
 
19. Proper reheating procedures for hot holding 
NOTE: The reheating temperatures of foods must be taken to determine compliance or 
noncompliance. Do not rely solely upon discussions with managers or cooks to determine 
compliance or noncompliance. Temperatures IN and OUT of compliance should be recorded 
in the “Temperature Observations” section of the inspection report. If there is insufficient space 
for the number of temperatures taken, additional temperatures should be documented in the 
“Observations and Corrective Actions” section of the inspection report.  
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on actual temperature 
measurements of foods upon completion of the reheating process and prior to being placed in 
hot holding using a calibrated food temperature measuring device. This item should be 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -36 
marked OUT of compliance if the items checked are not reheated to the required temperatures 
or within 2 hours prior to hot holding. 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. when foods are not held over for a second service and/or 
reheating for hot holding is not performed in the establishment.  
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. such as when foods are held over for a second service, but no 
foods are reheated during the time of inspection.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-403.11 Reheating for Hot Holding (P) 
 
20. Proper cooling time and temperatures 
NOTE:  The requirement for cooling cooked TCS food, is that the food must be cooled from 135°F to 
41°F or less in 6 hrs provided that the food is cooled from 135°F to 70°F within the first 2 
hours. For example, if a facility cools chili from 135°F to 70°F in 1.5 hours; they then have 4.5 
hours to get it from 70°F to 41°F or less. There are two critical limits that must be met with 
cooling. Discussions with the person in charge along with observations should be used to 
determine compliance. For instance, during discussion the person in charge says that a food 
product was cooled overnight in the walk-in cooler. The product is checked and the 
temperature is 50°F. Eight hours have elapsed from closing to opening. This item should be 
marked OUT because the product did not cool from 135°F to 70°F within two hours and from 
135°F to 41°F or less within a total of 6 hours. Temperatures IN compliance and OUT of 
compliance should be recorded in the “Temperature Observations” section of the inspection 
report. If there is insufficient space for the number of temperatures taken, additional 
temperatures should be documented in the “Observations and Corrective Actions” section of 
the inspection report. Because the entire cooling process is difficult to observe during an 
inspection, at the onset of the inspection a determination of whether foods are currently being 
cooled should be made. If cooling is taking place, temperatures should be taken to make a 
determination of whether proper cooling is possible with procedures being used.  
IN/OUT This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on actual temperatures of TCS 
foods in the cooling process. The basis for determining IN or OUT of compliance can also be 
supported through discussion and/or record review which would provide the inspector reliable 
data of the “start time” for cooling from 135°F. See above NOTE for an example of using 
actual temperature and discussion with the PIC in determining OUT of compliance without 
actually being at the establishment during the entire cooling of TCS process, from start to 
finish. 
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. when the establishment does not receive raw eggs, shellstock, 
or milk, prepares no TCS food from ambient temperature ingredients that require cooling, and 
does not cool cooked TCS food. 
N.O.  This item may be marked N.O. when the establishment does cool TCS food, but proper 
cooling per the prescribed temperature and time parameters cannot be determined during the 
length of the inspection. 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -37 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.14 Cooling (P) 
 
21. Proper hot holding temperatures 
NOTE:  Temperatures IN compliance and OUT of compliance should be recorded in the “Temperature 
Observations” section of the inspection report. If there is insufficient space for the number of 
temperatures taken, additional temperatures should be documented in the “Observations and 
Corrective Action” section of the inspection report. 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on actual food temperature 
measurements using a calibrated food temperature measuring device. This item should be 
marked IN compliance when the regulatory authority determines that, of the TCS food 
temperature measurements taken during the inspection, no hot holding temperatures are less 
than prescribed by the Code. This item is marked OUT of compliance if one TCS food is found 
out of temperature, unless Time as a Public Health Control (TPHC) is used for that TCS food. 
N.A  This item may be marked N.A. when the establishment does not hot hold food. 
N.O.  This item may be marked N.O. when the establishment does hot hold foods, but no foods are 
being held hot during the time of inspection. Inspections should be conducted during a time 
when hot holding temperatures can be taken. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.16(A)(1) Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Hot and Cold Holding (P) 
 
22. Proper cold holding temperatures 
NOTE:  Temperatures IN compliance and OUT of compliance should be recorded in the “Temperature 
Observations” section of the inspection report. If there is insufficient space for the number of 
temperatures taken, additional temperatures should be documented in the “Observations and 
Corrective Action” section of the inspection report. 
 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on actual food temperature 
measurements using a calibrated food temperature measuring device. Discussions should be 
made with the PIC to determine if a food is in the process of cooling, TPHC is used, or there is 
an approved method to render a food so that it is not TCS food. This item should be marked 
IN compliance when the regulatory authority determines that, of the temperature 
measurements taken during the inspection, no cold holding temperatures are greater than 
prescribed by the Code. This item should be marked OUT of compliance if one TCS food is 
found out of temperature, with supportive evidence, unless TPHC is used for that TCS food.  
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. when the establishment does not cold hold food. 
N.O This item may be marked N.O. when the establishment does cold hold food, but no foods are 
being held cold during the time of inspection. Inspections should be conducted during a time 
when hot  holding temperatures can be taken. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.16(A)(2) and (B) Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Hot and Cold Holding 
(P) 
23. Proper date marking and disposition 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -38 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance. This item would be IN compliance when 
there is a system in place for date marking all foods that are required to be date marked and is 
verified through observation. If date marking applies to the establishment, the PIC should be 
asked to describe the methods used to identify product shelf-life or “consume-by” dating. The 
regulatory authority must be aware of food products that are listed as exempt from date 
marking. For disposition, mark IN when foods are all within date marked time limits or food is 
observed being discarded within date marked time limits or OUT of compliance, such as when 
date marked food exceeds the time limit or date-marking is not done. 
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. when there is no ready-to-eat, TCS food prepared on-premise 
and held, or commercial containers of ready-to-eat, TCS food opened and held, over 24 hours 
in the establishment. 
N.O.  This item may be marked N.O. when the establishment does handle foods requiring date 
marking, but there are no foods requiring date marking in the facility at the time of inspection.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.17   Ready-To-Eat Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Date Marking 
(Pf) 
3-501.18  Ready-To-Eat Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Disposition (P) 
   
24. Time as a Public Health Control: procedures and records 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations, record 
review, a discussion with the PIC, and the review of any standard operating procedures to 
determine if the intent of the Code for use of TPHC is met. This provision only applies if it is 
the actual intention or conscious decision by the PIC to store TCS food out of temperature 
control using TPHC; otherwise, it may be a cold or hot holding issue. This item should be 
marked IN compliance if there is a written procedure at the food establishment that identifies 
the types of food products that will be held using time only, describes the procedure for how 
TPHC will be implemented, and if applicable delineates how food items, previously cooked 
and cooled before time is used, are properly cooled; and food items (marked or identified) do 
not exceed the 4-hour limit at any temperature or 6-hour limit at 70°F or less. This item should 
be marked OUT of compliance when the PIC implies the use of TPHC but does not have an 
effective mechanism for indicating the point in time when the food is removed from 
temperature control to the 4 or 6-hour discard time, or a written procedure or an effective 
mechanism for using TPHC is not present at the facility. 
N.A  This item may be marked when the establishment does not use time only as the public health 
control 
N.O.  This item may be markedN.O. when the establishment uses time only as the public health 
control, but is not using this practice at the time of inspection 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.19 Time as a Public Health Control 
(P, Pf, C) 
 
Consumer Advisory 
25. Consumer advisory provided for raw or undercooked food 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on a thorough review with the 
PIC of the posted, written and special/daily menus, to determine if untreated shell eggs, 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -39 
meats, fish, or poultry are used as an ingredient or ordered as a raw, raw-marinated, partially 
cooked, or undercooked food. The advisory also applies to shellstock offered for sale from a 
retail service case. This item should be marked IN compliance if the establishment provides an 
advisory that meets the intent of the Food Code for both the disclosure and reminder 
components. This item should be marked OUT of compliance when raw or undercooked foods 
are served or sold and there is no consumer advisory, the food item is not disclosed, or there 
is no reminder statement. The consumer advisory does not exempt the requirement for 
freezing for parasite control, nor should it be used for foods that have only gone through the 
initial heating and cooling stages of a non-continuous cooking process.  
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. when a food establishment does not serve a ready-to-eat food 
that necessitates an advisory, i.e., an animal food that is raw, undercooked, or not otherwise 
processed to eliminate pathogens. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-603.11 Consumption of Animal Foods that are Raw, Undercooked, or Not Otherwise Processed 
to Eliminate Pathogens (Pf) 
 
Highly Susceptible Population 
26 Pasteurized foods used; prohibited foods not offered 
NOTE:  Discussions with the PIC and employees regarding whether or not certain foods are served or 
certain practices occur in the establishment, along with observations should be used to 
determine compliance.  
 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations and 
discussions with the PIC and food employees regarding whether or not certain foods are 
served or certain practices occur in an establishment serving a highly susceptible population. 
Violations of bare hand contact by food employees serving a highly susceptible population 
¶ 3-801.11(D) is marked under Item #9. This item should be marked IN compliance if only 
treated/pasteurized juices/juice beverages are served; only pasteurized eggs are used in 
recipes if eggs are undercooked and if eggs are combined, unless there is a cook step or 
HACCP plan to control Salmonella enteriditis; no raw or partially cooked animal foods or raw 
seed sprouts are served; and no unopened packaged food is re-served following service to 
patients in medical isolation or quarantine.  
N.A.  This item may be markedif a highly susceptible population is not served. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-801.11(A), (B), (C), (E) and (G)  Pasteurized Foods, Prohibited Re-Service, and Prohibited 
Food (P, C) 
Food/Color Additives and Toxic Substances 
27. Food additives: approved and properly used 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
ingredients in storage and listed as product ingredients supplemented by discussion with the 
PIC. This item is marked IN compliance if approved food and color additives are on site and 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -40 
used properly or if sulfites are on the premises, and they are not applied to fresh 
fruits/vegetables for raw consumption. Approved food additives are listed and have threshold 
limits in accordance with the CFRs, and does not apply to food additives that are considered 
Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS), such as salt, pepper, etc. This item is marked OUT of 
compliance if unapproved additives are found on the premises or approved additives are 
improperly used, such as sulfites being applied to fresh fruits or vegetables. 
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. if the food establishment does not use any additives or sulfites 
on the premises. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-202.12  Additives (P) 
3-302.14 Protection from Unapproved Additives (P) 
 
28. Toxic substances properly identified, stored, and used; held for retail sale, properly 
Stored  
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
labeling, storage, reconstitution, and application of bulk and working containers of cleaning 
agents and sanitizers, personal care items, first aid supplies, medicines, pesticides, and 
potential toxic and poisonous substances. This item should be marked IN compliance when 
bulk and working containers of cleaning agents and sanitizers are labeled; sanitizing solutions 
are not exceeding the maximum concentrations; personal care items, first aid supplies, 
medicines, and chemicals are stored separate from and not above food, equipment, utensils, 
linens, and single-service and single-use articles; and restricted use pesticides are applied 
only by or under the supervision of a certified applicator. This item should be marked OUT of 
compliance if a cleaning agent or sanitizer is not properly identified and stored; if a sanitizing 
solution has a higher concentration than prescribed and medicines and first aid kits are 
improperly labeled and stored. Violations of solutions exceeding the recommended 
concentration in chemical washes for fruits and vegetables (§7-204.12) would be marked 
under Item #42. 
N.A.  This item may be marked N.A. if the establishment does not hold poisonous or toxic materials 
for retail sale. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
7-101.11  Identifying Information, Prominence-Original Containers 
(Pf) 
7-102.11  Common Name-Working Containers (Pf) 
7-201.11  Separation-Storage (P) 
7-202.11  Restriction-Presence and Use (Pf) 
7-202.12  Conditions of Use (P, Pf, C) 
7-203.11  Poisonous or Toxic Material Containers-Container Prohibitions (P) 
7-204.11  Sanitizers, Criteria-Chemicals (P) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -41 
7-204.12  Chemicals for Washing, Treatment, Storage and Processing Fruits and Vegetables, 
Criteria (P,) 
7-204.13  Boiler Water Additives, Criteria (P) 
7-204.14  Drying Agents, Criteria (P) 
7-205.11  Incidental Food Contact, Criteria-Lubricants (P) 
7-206.11  Restricted Use Pesticides, Criteria (P) 
7-206.12  Rodent Bait Stations (P) 
7-206.13  Tracking Powders, Pest Control and Monitoring (P, C) 
7-207.11  Restriction and Storage-Medicines (P, Pf) 
7-207.12  Refrigerated Medicines, Storage (P) 
7-208.11  Storage-First Aid Supplies (P, Pf) 
7-209.11  Storage-Other Personal Care Items (C) 
7-301.11 Separation-Storage and Display, Stock and Retail Sale (P)  
 
Conformance with Approved Procedures 
29. Compliance with variance, specialized process, reduced oxygen packaging criteria or HACCP 
plan 
NOTE  Except for fish a HACCP plan is not required when a TCS food is packaged using a reduced 
oxygen packaging method and is labeled with production time and date, held at required cold 
holding temperature, and removed from ROP packaging within 48 hours after packaging at the 
food establishment. 
IN/OUT  This item should be marked IN or OUT of compliance based on direct observations of food 
preparation and storage, a discussion with the PIC to determine if there are specialized food 
processes [i.e. smoking food, curing food, reduced oxygen packaging, using food additives to 
render a food so that it is not TCS food, cook chill, sous vide, etc.] and the record review of 
standard operating procedures and HACCP documentation. This item should be marked IN 
compliance when observations of food operations and review of available records indicate 
compliance is being met with regards to specialized food processes and HACCP plans were 
submitted to the regulatory authority prior to conducting a ROP operation that conforms to 
procedures within §3-502.12.This item should be marked OUT of compliance if the inspection 
reveals specialized food processes that are not approved by the regulatory authority are 
performed or not conducted in accordance with the approved variance or a HACCP plan was 
not submitted to the regulatory authority prior to engaging in a ROP operation without a 
variance or the approved variance is not retained in the food establishment. 
N.A.   This item may be marked N.A. if the establishment is not required by the regulatory authority 
to have a variance or HACCP plan, juice is not packaged or reduced oxygen packaging is not 
done on the premises. 
N.O.  Do Not Mark this item N.O. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-404.11  Treating Juice 
(P, Pf) 
3-502.11  Variance Requirement (Pf) 
3-502.12  Reduced Oxygen Packaging, Criteria (P, Pf) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -42 
4-204.110(B) Molluscan Shellfish Tanks (Pf) 
8-103.12  Conformance with Approved Procedures (P, Pf) 
8-201.13  When a HACCP Plan is Required (C) 
8-201.14 Contents of a HACCP Plan (Pf) 
 
Good Retail Practices (GRPs) 
D. Marking Instructions for each GOOD RETAIL PRACTICE (GRP) ON the 
Inspection Report  
Good Retail Practices (GRPs) are systems to control basic operational and sanitation conditions within a 
facility, and if not controlled, they could be contributing factors to foodborne illness by introducing hazards 
(biological, chemical and physical), into the end product, either directly or indirectly. For example, 
equipment in disrepair, such as a cutting board with deep grooves/cuts, makes effective cleaning difficult 
or impossible, and thereby could introduce a bacterial hazard onto food that comes into contact with the 
board. In addition, in assessing GRPs, it is important to make an overall assessment of the conditions by 
looking for trends versus an isolated incident; and the potential public health impact. For example, a few 
missing floor tiles in a dry area may not rise to the level of a “violation”; however, missing floor tiles in an 
area where equipment is subject to in-place manual cleaning without the use of an enclosed clean in 
place (CIP) system, i.e., using pressure hoses over band saws, slicers, or mixers, could create conditions 
whereby a bacterial hazard could be introduced on to the food equipment. These items usually require 
judgment, and if uncorrected, the regulatory authority must decide whether or not these conditions would 
lead to potential contamination.   
GRPs are the methods used in, or the facilities or controls used for, the receiving, preparation, storage, 
serving, packaging or holding of food which are designed to assure unsanitary conditions do not lead to 
the introduction of hazards or unintentional substances into the end product. The intention of this 
inspection form is to focus the inspector’s attention on those factors that have been shown to be most 
often linked with causing foodborne illness. Since the major emphasis of an inspection should be on the 
Risk Factors that cause foodborne illness and the Public Health interventions that have the greatest 
impact on preventing foodborne illness, the GRPs have been given less importance on the inspection 
form and a differentiation between IN, OUT, N.A. and N.O. is not made in this area, with a few exceptions 
noted below. For marking the GRPs section, place an “X” in the box to the left of the numbered item if a 
code provision under that item is of compliance. Document each violation of the code provision for the 
item number in the “Observations and Corrective Actions” section on the second page of the inspection 
report. For items marked OUT of compliance, further indicate the VIOLATION STATUS by marking an 
“X” in the corresponding box: COS = Corrected on site during inspection and R = Repeat violation per 
the same instructions as given in the Risk Factor section. References to the appropriate Food Code 
provisions that can be debited under each numbered GRP item are listed in Guide 3-B.  
Note: Items 30, 32, and 33 will allow for either three or four marking options. Item 30 allows for IN OUT or 
N.A., and items 32 and 33 allow for IN, OUT, N.A .or N.O. For marking in the GRP Section place an “A” in 
the box to the left of the numbered item if the code provision under that item is not applicable or and “O” 
for not observed.   
 
E. TEMPERATURE OBSERVATIONS 
Item/location  
Record the common name of the food as well as the condition, process, and location of 
the food at the time of monitoring e.g. hot holding, refrigerator, prep-table. Temperatures 
in compliance and out of compliance should be documented. If there is insufficient space 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -43 
for the number of temperatures taken, record the additional temperatures in the 
“Observations and Corrective Actions” section of the inspection report. 
Food Temperature 
 Record the temperature indicated on the inspector’s thermometer. Specify the 
measurement in °F or °C. (Note: Food temperature measuring devices that are scaled 
only in Fahrenheit should be accurate to ±2°F in the intended range of use. Food 
temperature measuring devices that are scaled only in Celsius or dually scaled in Celsius 
and Fahrenheit should be accurate to ± 1°C in the intended range of use.) 
 
F. OBSERVATIONS AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS 
Include here specific descriptions of violations observed and recorded in the Risk Factors and 
Interventions section and Good Retail Practices check boxes. Also include corrective actions for the 
noted violations and temperatures if there is insufficient space in the allotted section for temperature 
recordings.  
 
G. SIGNATURE BLOCK 
Field Description 
Person in Charge The PIC is the individual present at a food establishment who is responsible 
for the operation at the time of the inspection. 
Inspector The Inspector is the individual conducting the inspection. 
Date The date the inspection is completed. 
Follow-up The determination of whether to conduct a reinspection or other enforcement 
action. 
Follow-up Date The date the follow-up inspection will be conducted 
 
Safe Food and Water 
30. Pasteurized eggs used where required 
Certain menu items use eggs as an ingredient in the preparation of RTE foods, such as Caesar salad, 
Hollandaise sauce, etc. This is verified by discussion with the PIC and food employees regarding the 
substitution of pasteurized egg products for raw eggs in uncooked foods, unless allowed under 
¶ 3-401.11(D)(2). 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -44 
Applicable Code Section: 
3-302.13 Pasteurized Eggs Substituted for Raw Eggs for Certain Recipes (P) 
31. Water and ice from approved source 
There are two types of systems: Public Water System or Non-Public Water System. Regardless of its 
source, it must meet drinking water standards established by EPA and applicable state drinking water 
quality standards. If a non-public system is used as Drinking water, the water is sampled / tested at least 
yearly and records retained on file at the food establishment or per state regulations. Consideration must 
be given to the supply containers, piping, hoses, etc., connected to the APPROVED source when water is 
made available for mobile and/or temporary food establishment without a permanent supply.  
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-202.16 Ice (P) 
5-101.11 Approved System-Source (P) 
5-102.11 Standards-Quality (P) 
5-102.12 Nondrinking Water (P) 
5-102.13 Sampling (Pf) 
5-102.14 Sample Report (C) 
5-104.12 Alternative Water Supply (Pf) 
 
32. Variance obtained for specialized processing methods 
When a Food Establishment wants to deviate from a requirement in the code, utilizes Specialized 
Processing Methods as specified in § 3-502.11 such as Smoking Food for Preservation, curing food etc. a 
variance must first be obtained from the regulatory authority. A HACCP plan may also be required as 
listed in ¶ 8-201.13(A) as part of the variance request.  
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. if the establishment is not engaged in a specialized processing 
method, other operation requiring a variance and a HACCP plan or a process or processing 
method determined by the regulatory authority to require a variance and a HACCP plan. 
Applicable Code Section: 
8-103.11 Documentation of Proposed Variance and Justification 
(Pf) 
 
Food Temperature Control 
33. Proper cooling methods used; adequate equipment for temperature control 
A determination must first be made that cooling food is part of the processing step. To assess whether or 
not the methods used facilitate the cooling criteria specified under § 3-501.14, a discussion with the PIC 
should support actual observations used in cooling foods. There should be enough equipment with 
sufficient capacity used for the cooling, heating and hot/cold holding of foods requiring temperature 
control as specified in Chapter 3 to meet the demands of the operation. Observations must support the 
determination of compliance status. Frozen food is solid to the touch. 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -45 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.11  Frozen Food (C) 
3-501.15  Cooling Methods (Pf, C) 
4-301.11  Cooling, Heating, and Holding Capacities-Equipment (Pf) 
 
34. Plant food properly cooked for hot holding 
In determining compliance, observation along with an actual cooking temperature must be obtained. 
 
N.A. This item may be marked N.A. if vegetables and fruits are not cooked for hot holding in the 
establishment. 
N.O. This item may be marked N.O. when plant foods are cooked for hot holding, but are not 
available for observation during the inspection. 
 
Applicable Code Section: 
3-401.13  Plant Food Cooking for Hot Holding 
(Pf) 
 
35. Approved thawing methods used 
Observing and then gaining an understanding of the establishment’s thawing method(s) will help in 
determining whether a violation exists from the approved thawing methods found under § 3-501.13 as 
well as the level of risk imposed. Keep in mind that various food products especially those destined for 
deep-fat frying are often slacked (not thawed) prior to cooking. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-501.12  Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Slacking 
(C) 
3-501.13  Thawing (Pf) 
 
N.A.   This item may be marked N.A. if TCS food are not thawed. 
 
N.O.   This item may be marked N.O. if this food is thawed, but thawing was not observed during the 
inspection. 
 
36. Thermometers provided and accurate 
Thermometers provide a means for assessing active managerial control of TCS food temperatures. 
Determine compliance by observing the in-use storage location and verifying the scaling of 
the temperature measuring devices in the range of use to measure food, water, or ambient air 
temperatures. Food thermometers must be calibrated at a frequency to ensure accuracy. Food 
thermometers should be accessible for use by employees and have a probe size appropriate to 
the food item. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -46 
4-203.11  Temperature Measuring Devices, Food-Accuracy (Pf) 
4-203.12  Temperature Measuring Devices, Ambient Air and Water-Accuracy (Pf) 
4-204-112 Temperature Measuring Devices-Functionality (Pf, C) 
 4-302.12  Food Temperature Measuring Devices (Pf)  
4-502.11(B)  Good Repair and Calibration (Pf) 
 
Food Identification 
37. Food properly labeled; original container 
Packaged foods are required to conform to specific labeling laws. Foods packaged within the food 
establishment must also conform to the appropriate labeling laws, be accurate and not misleading. All 
major food allergens, if present, must be accurately declared on the package. In addition, all unpackaged 
food items containing a major food allergen as an ingredient must have a written notification declaring 
which major food allergens are contained in that food item. Working containers removed from their 
original packaging require some level of assessment as to how recognizable the food is without labeling 
by its common name. Bulk foods that are available for consumer self-dispensing will need to be 
prominently labeled with the name of the food source for each major food allergen contained in the food, 
unless the food source is already part of the common name or usual name of the ingredient. Molluscan 
shellfish and vended TCS foods must specifically be assessed based on their specific packaging and 
labeling requirements. Molluscan Shellfish shall not be commingled. 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-203.11 Molluscan Shellfish, Original Container 
(C) 
3-302.12 Food Storage Containers Identified with Common Name of Food (C) 
3-305.13 Vended Time/Temperature Control for Safety Food, Original Container (C) 
3-601.11 Standards of Identity (C) 
3-601.12 Honestly Presented (C) 
3-602.11 Food Labels (Pf, C) 
3-602.12  Other Forms of Information (C) 
 
Prevention of Food Contamination 
38. Insects, rodents and animals not Present 
An assessment is made through observation and discussion with the PIC for measures taken to control 
the presence of pests in the food establishment, including elimination of entry points and harborage 
areas, and removal of pests and its evidence. Insect trapping devices must not be located over food 
preparation areas. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
2-403.11 Handling Prohibition-Animals (Pf) 
6-202.13 Insect Control Devices, Design and Installation (C) 
6-202.15 Outer Openings, Protected (C) 
 6-202.16 Exterior Walls and Roofs, Protective Barrier (C) 
6-501.111  Controlling Pests (Pf, C) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -47 
6-501.112  Removing Dead or Trapped Birds, Insects, Rodents and other Pest (C) 
  6-501.115  Prohibiting Animals (Pf) 
 
39. Contamination prevented during food preparation, storage and display 
The observation and understanding of the flow of food items from the point of receipt to the point of sale, 
service or distribution is necessary to determine whether a violation exists. Food is subject to direct and 
indirect sources of contamination in the establishment. Sources may be related to the working 
environment, packaging, adequacy of storage facilities, and exposure of food on display to contamination 
(i.e. salad bars). 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-202.17 Shellstock, Condition 
(C) 
3-303.11 Ice Used as Exterior Coolant, Prohibited as Ingredient (P) 
3-303.12 Storage or Display of Food in Contact with Water or Ice (C) 
3-304.13 Linens and Napkins, Use Limitations (C) 
3-305.11 Food Storage-Preventing Contamination from the Premises (C) 
3-305.12 Food Storage, Prohibited Areas (C), (Pf) 
3-305.14 Food Preparation (C) 
3-306.11 Food Display-Preventing Contamination by Consumers (P) 
3-306.12 Condiments, Protection (C) 
3-306.13(B) and (C)  Consumer Self-Service Operations (Pf) 
3-307.11 Miscellaneous Sources of Contamination (C) 
6-404.11 Segregation and Location-Distressed Merchandise (Pf) 
 
40. Personal cleanliness 
Observation of facility personnel for clean outer clothing, effective hair restraints, prohibited jewelry and 
the condition or protection of fingernails must be made. This includes the use of single-use gloves over an 
impermeable bandage, finger cot or finger stall. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
2-302.11 Maintenance-Fingernails 
(Pf) 
2-303.11 Prohibition-Jewelry (C) 
2-304.11 Clean Condition-Outer Clothing (C) 
2-401.13 Use of Bandages, Finger Cots, or Finger Stalls(C) 
2-402.11 Effectiveness-Hair Restraints (C) 
41. Wiping cloths; properly used and stored 
Wiping cloths are to be used for a designated purpose and properly used. When stored in solution, the 
solutions should be reasonably clean and maintained at the proper sanitizer concentration (§4-501.114). 
Solutions exceeding the recommended sanitizer concentrations would be marked on the Inspection Form 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -48 
under item #28, Toxic substances properly identified, stored, and used. Sponges, if present, are not to be 
used in contact with clean/sanitized food contact surfaces. 
Applicable Code Sections: 
3-304.14 Wiping Cloths, Use Limitation (C) 
4-101.16 Sponges Use Limitation (C) 
 4-901.12 Wiping Cloths, Air Drying Location (C) 
42. Washing fruits and vegetables 
Raw fruits and vegetables are to be washed prior to their preparation or offered as RTE. Chemicals are 
allowed for washing fruits and vegetables, along with simply washing them in water. Chemicals that are 
used in the wash water for fruits and vegetables must be listed and approved with threshold limits in 
accordance with the CFR’s. Refer to the label or labeling of the additive for adequate directions and to 
assure safe use. Discussion with the PIC and food employees will help determine the establishment’s 
practice. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
 3-302.15 Washing Fruits and Vegetables 
(Pf, C) 
7-204.12 Chemicals for Washing, Treatment, Storage and Processing Fruits and Vegetables, 
Criteria (P ) 
 
43. In-use utensils; properly stored 
Based on the type of operation, there are a number of methods available for storage of in-use utensils 
during pauses in food preparation or dispensing, such as in the food, clean and protected, or under 
running water to prevent bacterial growth. If stored in a container of water, the water temperature must be 
at least 135°F. In-use utensils may not be stored in chemical sanitizer or ice between uses. Ice scoops 
may be stored handles up in an ice bin except for an ice machine. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
 3-304.12 In-Use Utensils, Between-Use Storage (C) 
 
44. Utensils, equipment and linens; properly stored, dried, handled 
 An assessment is made of the overall storage practices and handling of clean equipment and utensils, 
including tableware located in the various areas within an establishment, including the basement, wait 
station and dining room. Equipment must be air dried prior to storage, and linens must be properly 
cleaned and stored. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-801.11 Clean Linens (C) 
4-802.11   Specifications-Laundering Frequency (C) 
4-803.11   Storage of Soiled Linens (C) 
4-803.12 Mechanical Washing (C) 
4-901.11 Equipment and Utensils, Air-Drying Required (C) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -49 
4-903.11(A), (B) and (D) Equipment, Utensils, Linens and Single-Service and Single-Use Articles-  
Storing(C) 
4-903.12 Prohibitions (C), (Pf) 
4-904.11 Kitchenware and Tableware-Preventing Contamination (C) 
4-904.12 Soiled and Clean Tableware (C) 
 4-904.13 Preset Tableware (C) 
 4-904.14 Rinsing Equipment and Utensils after Cleaning and Sanitizing(C) 
 
45. Single-use/single-service articles; properly stored, used 
These items are not designed to be cleaned and re-used; therefore, they must be properly stored and 
protected to prevent from possible contamination. Food establishments without facilities for cleaning and 
sanitizing kitchenware and tableware shall provide only single-use and single-service articles. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-502.12 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles, Required Use (P) 
4-502.13 Single-Service and Single-Use Articles-Use Limitations (C) 
4-502.14   Shells, Use Limitations (C) 
4-903.11(A) and (C)   Equipment, Utensils, Linens and Single-Service and Single-Use Articles-
Storing(C)  
4-903.12   Prohibitions (C) 
 4-904.11 Kitchenware and Tableware-Preventing Contamination (C) 
 
46. Gloves used properly  
 The observation of food preparation activities and glove-use by food employees is necessary. There 
should be a discussion with the PIC on how gloves are used, if applicable, in food preparation activities. 
Gloves may serve as a source of cross-contamination if misused. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
 3-304.15(B)-(D)  Gloves, Use Limitations (C) 
 
Utensils, Equipment and Vending 
47. Food and non-food-contact surfaces cleanable, properly designed, constructed and used 
 Equipment and utensils must be properly designed and constructed, and in good repair. Proper 
installation and location of equipment in the food establishment are important factors to consider for ease 
of cleaning in preventing accumulation of debris and attractants for insects and rodents. The components 
in a vending machine must be properly designed to facilitate cleaning and protect food products (e.g., 
equipped with automatic shutoff, etc.) from potential contamination. Equipment must be properly used 
and in proper adjustment, such as calibrated food thermometers.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -50 
 3-304.16 Using Clean Tableware for Second Portions and Refills (C) 
3-304.17 Refilling Returnables (P) 
 4-101.11 Characteristics-Materials for Construction and Repair (P, C) 
 4-101.12 Cast Iron, Use Limitations (C) 
4-101.13 Lead, Use Limitation (P, C) 
 4-101.14 Copper Use Limitation (P) 
 4-101.15 Galvanized Metal, Use Limitation (P) 
 4-101.17 Wood, Use Limitation (C) 
 4-101.18 Nonstick Coatings, Use Limitation (C) 
 4-101.19 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces (C) 
 4-102.11 Characteristics-Single-Service and Single-Use (P, C) 
 4-201.11 Equipment and Utensils-Durability and Strength (C) 
 4-201.12 Food Temperature Measuring Devices (P) 
 4-202.11 Food-Contact Surfaces-Cleanability (Pf) 
 4-202.12 CIP Equipment (Pf, C) 
 4-202.13 V” Threads, Use Limitation (C) 
 4-202.14 Hot Oil Filtering Equipment (C) 
4-202.15 Can Openers (C) 
4-202.16 Nonfood-Contact Surfaces (C) 
4-202.17 Kick Plates Removable (C) 
4-204.12 Equipment Openings, Closures and Deflectors (C)  
4-204.13 Dispensing Equipment, Protection of Equipment and Food (P, C) 
4-204.14 Vending Machine Vending Stage Closure (C) 
4-204.15 Bearings and Gear Boxes, Leakproof (C) 
4-204.16 Beverage Tubing, Separation(C)  
4-204.17 Ice Units, Separation of Drains (C) 
4-204.18 Condenser Unit, Separation (C) 
4-204.19 Can Openers on Vending Machines (C) 
4-204.110(A)  Molluscan Shellfish Tanks (P) 
4-204.111 Vending Machines, Automatic Shutoff (P)  
4-204.120 Equipment Compartments, Drainage (C) 
4-204.121 Vending Machines, Liquid Waste Products (C) 
4-204.122 Case Lot Handling Apparatuses, Movability (C) 
4-204.123 Vending Machine Doors and Openings (C) 
4-302.11 Utensils, Consumer Self-Service (Pf) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -51 
4-401.11 Equipment, Clothes Washers, Dryers and Storage Cabinets, Contamination Prevention- 
Location (C), (Pf) 
4-402.11 Fixed Equipment, Spacing or Sealing-Installation (C) 
4-402.12 Fixed Equipment, Elevation or Sealing (C) 
4-501.11 Good Repair and Proper Adjustment-Equipment (C) 
4-501.12 Cutting Surfaces (C) 
4-501.13 Microwave Ovens (C) 
4-502.11(A) and (C) Good Repair and Calibration-Utensils and Temperature and Pressure Measuring 
Devices (C) 
4-603.11 Dry Cleaning-Methods (C) 
4-902.11 Food-Contact Surfaces-Lubricating and Reassembling (C)  
 4-902.12 Equipment-Lubricating and Reassembling (C) 
 
48. Warewashing Facilities, Installed, Maintained, Used, Test Strips 
Adequate warewashing facilities must be available and used for the cleaning and sanitization of food-
contact surfaces, including the availability of means to monitor its use and the effectiveness of 
sanitization. For example, an irreversible registering temperature indicator is provided and readily 
accessible for measuring the utensil surface temperature for establishments that have a hot water 
mechanical warewashing operation. Observation of manual and mechanical warewashing methods are 
made to assess the procedure for cleaning and sanitizing equipment and utensils. This item is marked 
OUT of compliance when cleaners and sanitizers are not available for use within the food establishment.  
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-203.13  Pressure Measuring Devices, Mechanical Warewashing Equipment 
(C) 
4-204.113  Warewashing Machine, Data Plate Operation Specifications (C) 
4-204.114  Warewashing Machines, Internal Baffles (C) 
4-204.115  Warewashing Machines, Temperature Measuring Devices (Pf) 
4-204.116  Manual Warewashing Equipment, Heaters and Baskets (Pf) 
4-204.117  Warewashing Machines, Automatic Dispensing of Detergents and Sanitizers (Pf) 
4-204.118  Warewashing Machines, Flow Pressure Device (C) 
4-204.119  Warewashing Sinks and Drainboards, Self-Draining (C) 
4-301.12  Manual Warewashing, Sink Compartment Requirements (Pf, C) 
4-301.13  Drainboards (C) 
4-302.13  Temperature Measuring Devices, Manual and Mechanical Warewashing (Pf) 
4-302.14  Sanitizing Solutions, Testing Devices (Pf) 
4-303.11   Cleaning Agents and Sanitizers, Availability (Pf) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -52 
4-501.14 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Frequency (C) 
4-501.15 Warewashing Machines, Manufacturers’ Operating Instructions (C) 
4-501.16 Warewashing Sinks, Use Limitation (C) 
4-501.17 Warewashing Equipment, Cleaning Agents (Pf) 
4-501.18 Warewashing Equipment, Clean Solutions (C) 
4-501.19 Manual Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature (Pf) 
4-501.110 Mechanical Warewashing Equipment, Wash Solution Temperature (Pf)  
4-501.116  Warewashing Equipment, Determining Chemical Sanitizer Concentration (Pf) 
4-603.12 Precleaning (C) 
4-603.13 Loading of Soiled Items, Warewashing Machines (C) 
4-603.14 Wet Cleaning (C) 
4-603.15 Washing, Procedures for Alternative Manual Warewashing Equipment (C) 
4-603.16 Rinsing Procedures (C)  
 
49. Non-food-contact surfaces clean 
Observations should be made to determine if the frequency of cleaning is adequate to prevent soil 
accumulations on non-food-contact surfaces. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-601.11(B) and (C)  Equipment, Food-Contact Surfaces, Nonfood-Contact Surfaces, and Utensils (C) 
4-602.13  Nonfood Contact Surfaces (C) 
 
Physical Facilities 
50. Hot and cold water available; adequate pressure 
Regardless of the supply system, the distribution of water to the facility must be protected and operated 
according to law.  Adequate pressure is to be maintained at all fixtures during peak demand including the 
capacity to provide hot water at peak hot water demand. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
5-103.11  Capacity-Quantity and Availability (Pf) 
5-103.12  Pressure (Pf) 
5-104.11 System-Distribution, Delivery, and Retention (Pf) 
 
51. Plumbing installed; proper backflow devices 
The observation of an approved plumbing system, installed and maintained, including the equipment and 
devices connected to the potable water supply, is necessary to determine whether a violation exists. An 
assessment of the layout of the establishment and the water distribution system is made to determine if 
there are any points at which the potable water supply is subject to contamination or is in disrepair.  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -53 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
5-101.12  System Flushing and Disinfection (P) 
5-201.11  Approved-Materials (P) 
5-202.11  Approved System and Cleanable Fixtures (P, C) 
5-202.13  Backflow Prevention, Air Gap (P) 
5-202.14  Backflow Prevention Device, Design Standard (P) 
5-202.15  Conditioning Device, Design (C) 
5-203.13  Service Sink (C) 
5-203.14  Backflow Prevention Device, When Required (P) 
5-203.15  Backflow Prevention Device. Carbonator (P) 
5-204.12  Backflow Prevention Device, Location (C) 
5-204.13  Conditioning Device, Location (C) 
5-205.12  Prohibiting a Cross Connection (P, Pf) 
5-205.13  Scheduling Inspection and Service for a Water System Device (Pf) 
5-205.14  Water Reservoir of Fogging Devices, Cleaning (P) 
5-205.15  System Maintained in Good Repair (P, C) 
5-301.11  Approved-Materials, Mobile Water Tank and Mobile Food Establishment Water Tank (P, C) 
5-302.11  Enclosed System, Sloped to Drain (C) 
5-302.12  Inspection and Cleaning Port, Protected and Secured (C) 
5-302.13  “V” Type Threads, Use Limitation (C) 
5-302.14  Tank Vent, Protected (C) 
5-302.15  Inlet and Outlet, Sloped to Drain (C) 
5-302.16  Hose, Construction and Identification (P, C) 
5-303.11 Filter, Compressed Air (P) 
5-303.12 Protective Cover or Device (C) 
5-303.13 Mobile Food Establishment Tank Inlet (C) 
5-304.11 System Flushing and Sanitization-Operation and Maintenance (P) 
5-304.12 Using a Pump and Hoses, Backflow Prevention (C) 
5-304.13 Protecting Inlet, Outlet and Hose Fitting (C) 
5-304.14 Tank, Pump and Hoses, Dedication (P) 
 
52. Sewage and waste water properly disposed 
There are two types of systems: public sewage treatment plant and an individual sewage disposal 
system. Observations of the facilities overall sewage and wastewater system is necessary to determine if 
a violation exists. Indications that a system is not functioning properly may include the presence of 
sewage back-up into the establishment or outdoors on the ground. Condensate drippage and other non-
sewage wastes must be drained to a system in accordance to LAW, and backflow prevention, if required, 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -54 
installed between the sewage system and drain of equipment holding food or utensils. Mobile wastewater 
holding tanks must also be assessed for capacity and maintenance. 
Applicable Code Sections: 
 5-401.11  Capacity and Drainage (C) 
 5-402.11  Backflow Prevention (P) 
 5-402.12  Grease Trap (C) 
 5-402.13  Conveying Sewage (P) 
 5-402.14  Removing Mobile Food Establishment Wastes (Pf) 
 5-402.15  Flushing a Waste Retention Tank (C) 
 5-403.11  Approved Sewage Disposal System (P) 
 5-403.12  Other Liquid Wastes and Rainwater (C) 
 
53. Toilet facilities: properly constructed, supplied, clean 
A toilet facility should be assessed to determine if: it is not an attractant to insects; the number of fixtures 
are adequate; toilet tissue and a covered trash receptacle (ladies room only) are provided; fixtures are not 
being kept clean; and the door self-closes to prevent recontamination of hands.  
Applicable Code Sections: 
5-203.12 Toilets and Urinals (C) 
5-501.17 Toilet Room Receptacle, Covered (C) 
6-202.14 Toilet Rooms, Enclosed (C) 
6-302.11 Toilet Tissue, Availability (Pf) 
6-402.11 Conveniently Located (C) 
6-501.18 Cleaning of Plumbing Fixtures (C) 
6-501.19 Closing Toilet Room Doors (C)  
 
54. Garbage/refuse properly disposed; facilities maintained 
The assessment of the refuse collection and disposal areas for proper receptacles and maintenance is 
necessary to determine whether a violation exists. Since refuse areas may attract and harbor insects and 
pests, as well as create a public health nuisance, particular attention must be paid to the maintenance of 
the refuse facilities and area. 
Applicable Code Sections: 
5-501.11  Outdoor Storage Surface (C)  
5-501.12  Outdoor Enclosure (C) 
5-501.13  Receptacles (C) 
5-501.14  Receptacles in Vending Machines (C)  
5-501.15  Outside Receptacles (C) 
5-501.16  Storage Areas, Rooms and Receptacles, Capacity and Availability (C) 
5-501.18  Cleaning Implements and Supplies (C) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -55 
5-501.19  Storage Areas, Redeeming Machines, Receptacles and Waste Handling Units,  
Location(C) 
5-501.110  Storage Refuse, Recyclables and Returnables (C) 
5-501.111  Area, Enclosures and Receptacles, Good Repair (C) 
5-501.112  Outside Storage Prohibitions (C) 
5-501.113  Covering Receptacles (C) 
5-501.114  Using Drain Plugs (C) 
5-501.115  Maintaining Refuse Areas and Enclosures(C)  
5-501.116  Cleaning Receptacles (C) 
5-502.11  Frequency-Removal (C) 
5-502.12  Receptacles or Vehicles (C) 
5-503.11  Community or Individual Facility (C) 
6-202.110  Outdoor refuse Areas, Curbed and Graded to Drain (C) 
 
55. Physical facilities installed, maintained, and clean 
Observations are made of the overall conditions or practices related to the physical facility (e.g., materials 
used, good repair, and maintained). It is important to make an overall assessment of the physical facility 
conditions to determine the level of compliance and the potential public health impact involved if 
compliance is not met. Storage of maintenance tools, use of laundry facilities, if applicable, disposal of mop 
water and separate living/sleeping quarters are included in this section. 
 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-301.15  Clothes Washers and Dryers (C) 
4-401.11(C) Equipment, Cloths Washers and Dryers, and Storage Cabinets, Contamination 
Prevention (C) 
4-803.13  Use of Laundry Facilities (C) 
6-101.11  Surface Characteristics-Indoor Areas (C) 
6-102.11  Surface Characteristics-Outdoor Areas (C) 
6-201.11  Floors, Walls and Ceilings-Cleanability (C) 
6-201.12  Floors, Walls, and Ceilings, Utility Lines (C) 
6-201.13  Floor and Wall Junctures, Coved, and Enclosed or Sealed (C) 
6-201.14  Floor Carpeting, Restrictions and Installation (C) 
6-201.15  Floor Covering, Mats and Duckboards (C) 
6-201.16  Wall and Ceiling Coverings and Coatings (C) 
6-201.17  Walls and Ceilings, Attachments (C) 
6-201.18  Walls and Ceilings, Studs, Joists, and Rafters (C) 
6-202.17  Outdoor Food Vending Areas. Overhead Protection (C) 
6-202.18  Outdoor Servicing Areas, Overhead Protection (C) 
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -56 
6-202.19  Outdoor Walking and Driving Surfaces, Graded to Drain (C) 
6-202.111  Private Homes and Living or Sleeping Quarters, Use Prohibition (P) 
6-202.112  Living or Sleeping Quarters, Separation (C)  
6-501.11    Repairing-Premises, Structures, Attachments, and Fixtures-Methods (C) 
6-501.12    Cleaning, Frequency and Restrictions (C) 
6-501.13    Cleaning Floors, Dustless Methods (C) 
6-501.15    Cleaning Maintenance Tools, Preventing Contamination (Pf) 
6-501.16    Drying Mops(C)  
6-501.17    Absorbent Materials on Floors, Use Limitation (C) 
6-501.113  Storing Maintenance Tools (C) 
6-501.114  Maintaining Premises, Unnecessary Items and Litter (C) 
 
56. Adequate ventilation and lighting; designated areas used 
Observations should be made to ensure that the ventilation is adequately preventing an accumulation of 
condensation, grease or other soil from potentially contaminating food and the surrounding environment 
and that lights are at an adequate light intensity, and personal belongings are properly stored to maintain 
clean and sanitary facility and protect food and equipment. 
  
FDA Food Code 2022                             Annex 7: Model Forms, Guides, and Other Aids 
 
Annex 7 -57 
Applicable Code Sections: 
4-202.18  Ventilation Hood Systems, Filters (C) 
4-204.11  Ventilation Hood Systems, Drip Prevention (C) 
4-301.14  Ventilation Hood Systems, Adequacy (C) 
6-202.11  Light Bulbs, Protective Shielding (C) 
6-202.12  Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning System Vents (C) 
6-303.11  Intensity-Lighting (C)  
6-304.11  Mechanical-Ventilation (C) 
6-305.11  Designation-Dressing Areas and Lockers (C) 
6-403.11  Designated Areas-Employee Accommodations for eating/drinking/smoking (C) 
6-501.14  Cleaning Ventilation Systems, Nuisance and Discharge Prohibition (C) 
6-501.110  Using Dressing Rooms and Lockers (C) 
  
