580 
9 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 424.22 
Class of substance Substance Purpose Products Amount 
Papain .................... To soften tissue ...... Raw poultry muscle tissue 
of hen, cock, mature tur-
key, mature duck, mature 
goose, and mature guin-
ea, and raw meat cuts.
Solutions consisting of 
water and approved 
proteolytic enzyme ap-
plied or injected into raw 
meat or poultry tissue 
shall not result in a gain 
of more than 3 percent 
above the weight of the 
untreated product. 
Potassium chloride ......do ...................... ......do .................................. Not more than 3 percent of 
a 2.0 molar solution. 
Potassium, magne-
sium or calcium 
chloride.
......do ...................... ......do .................................. A solution of approved inor-
ganic chlorides injected 
into or applied to raw 
meats or poultry cuts 
shall not result in a gain 
of more than 3 percent 
above the weight of the 
untreated product. 
1 [Reserved] 
2 Information as to the specific products for which use of this additive is approved may be obtained upon inquiry addressed to 
the Labeling and Additives Policy Division, Food Safety and Inspection Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 
20250. 
3 Provided that its use is functional and suitable for the product and it is permitted for use at the lowest level necessary to a c-
complish the desired technical effect as determined in specific cases prior to label approval under part 412 of this chapter. 
4 Special labeling requirements are prescribed in 381.120 for raw poultry chilled in a medium with more than 70 lbs. of salt to 
10,000 gals. of water. 
[64 FR 72175, Dec. 23, 1999, as amended at 65 FR 3123, Jan. 20, 2000; 65 FR 34391, May 30, 2000; 
78 FR 66839, Nov. 7, 2013; 83 FR 25308, May 31, 2018; 84 FR 65268, Nov. 27, 2019] 
§ 424.22 Certain other permitted uses. 
(a) Under appropriate declaration as 
required in parts 316 and 317 of this 
chapter, the following substances may 
be added to meat: 
(1) General. Common salt, approved 
sugars (sucrose, cane or beet sugar), 
maple sugar, dextrose, invert sugar, 
honey, corn syrup solids (corn syrup, 
glucose syrup and fructose), wood 
smoke, vinegar, flavorings, spices, so-
dium nitrate, sodium nitrite, potas-
sium nitrate, potassium nitrite, and 
other food and color additives specified 
in the chart in paragraph (c) of this 
section may be added to meat under 
conditions, if any, specified in this part 
or in part 317 of this chapter. 
(2) Artificial flavorings. Other harm-
less artificial flavorings may be added 
to meat, with the approval of the Ad-
ministrator in specific cases. 
(3) Coloring matter and dyes. Coloring 
matter and dyes, other than those 
specified in a regulation permitting 
that use in this chapter or in 21 CFR 
Chapter I, Subchapter A and Sub-
chapter B, may be applied to meat 
mixed with rendered fat, applied to 
natural and artificial casings, and ap-
plied to such casings enclosing prod-
ucts, if approved by the Administrator 
in specific cases. When any coloring 
matter or dye is applied to casings, 
there shall be no penetration of color-
ing into the product. 
(b) Use of nitrite and sodium ascorbate 
or sodium erythorbate (isoascorbate) in 
bacon—(1) Pumped bacon. With respect 
to bacon injected with curing ingredi-
ents and massaged bacon, sodium ni-
trite shall be used at 120 parts per mil-
lion (ppm) ingoing or an equivalent 
amount of potassium nitrite shall be 
used (148 ppm ingoing); and 550 ppm of 
sodium ascorbate or sodium 
erythorbate (isoascorbate) shall be 
used. Sodium ascorbate or sodium 
erythorbate have a molecular weight of 
approximately 198. Hydrated forms of 
these substances shall be adjusted to 
attain the equivalent of 550 ppm of so-
dium ascorbate or sodium erythorbate. 
(i) The Department shall collect sam-
ples of pumped bacon from producing 
plants and analyze them for the level 
of nitrosamines by the Thermal Energy 
Analyzer (TEA). In the event that a 
TEA analysis indicates that a confirm-
able level of nitrosamines might be 
present, additional samples shall be 
collected and analyzed by gas chroma-
tography. Presumptive positive results 
581 
Food Safety and Inspection Service, USDA § 424.22 
must be confirmed by mass spectrom-
etry before being considered positive. If 
during the interval required for the De-
partment to analyze the confirmatory 
samples by gas chromatography and 
mass spectrometry, changes are made 
in processing procedures which are ex-
pected to result in no confirmable lev-
els of nitrosamines in pumped bacon 
produced by these new procedures, an 
establishment may submit samples to 
USDA for analysis upon prior notifica-
tion and arrangements with USDA. If, 
however, an establishment furnishes 
USDA with laboratory results from 
testing five consecutive lots of pumped 
bacon produced under the new proce-
dures and the testing is performed by 
the USDA methodology and proce-
dures, those results will be utilized in 
making the determination concerning 
the product produced under the new 
procedures. Should the results of these 
tests reveal that confirmable levels of 
nitrosamines are not indicated in any 
of the five consecutive lots, the con-
firmation analysis by USDA shall be 
terminated and the establishment shall 
revert to normal monitoring status. In 
the event the test results continue to 
indicate nitrosamines, however, USDA 
shall proceed in its confirmation anal-
ysis on the original samples taken for 
confirmation. If any one of the original 
samples collected by USDA for con-
firmation is found to contain confirm-
able levels of nitrosamines, all pumped 
bacon in the producing establishment 
and all future production will be re-
tained. The Department shall sample 
and analyze such retained pumped 
bacon for nitrosamines on a lot by lot 
basis. A production lot shall be that 
pumped bacon produced by the estab-
lishment in any single shift. Samples 
from any lot of pumped bacon under re-
tention found to contain nitrosamines 
at a confirmable level shall cause the 
lot of pumped bacon to be disposed of 
in a manner to ensure it will not form 
nitrosamines when cooked. Such dis-
posal may include incorporation of the 
uncooked pumped bacon as an ingre-
dient of another meat provided it is 
processed for eating without further 
preparation in a manner to preclude 
the formation of nitrosamines. Bacon 
subsequently produced shall not be re-
tained because of nitrosamines if the 
operator of the establishment makes 
adjustments in the processing of the 
product and laboratory results ob-
tained by TEA analysis of samples 
from five consecutive normal sized lots 
of pumped bacon indicates that the 
product being produced contains no 
confirmable levels of nitrosamines. 
These tests from five consecutive nor-
mal sized lots of pumped bacon shall be 
conducted by the Department. How-
ever, if the establishment furnishes the 
Department with the results of tests 
conducted under the methodology and 
procedures used by the Department, 
such test results will be utilized in 
making the determination concerning 
the nitrosamine content of the prod-
uct. All tests of pumped bacon for 
nitrosamines under this paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) shall be made on pumped bacon 
cooked at 340 degrees F. for 3 minutes 
on each side. In order to determine 
that no confirmable levels of 
nitrosamines are present in a sample 
tested, the testing must be performed 
by methodology and procedures that 
would detect the presence of any 
nitrosamines at 10 ppb. 
(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of 
paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, so-
dium nitrite may be used at: 
(A) 100 ppm ingoing (potassium ni-
trite at 123 ppm ingoing); and 550 ppm 
sodium ascorbate or sodium 
erythorbate (isoascorbate) shall be 
used; or 
(B) A predetermined level between 40 
and 80 ppm (potassium nitrite at a 
level between 49 and 99 ppm); 550 ppm 
sodium ascorbate or sodium 
erythorbate (isoascorbate); and addi-
tional sucrose or other similar fer-
mentable carbohydrate at a minimum 
of 0.7 percent and an inoculum of lactic 
acid producing bacteria such as 
Pediococcus acetolactii or other bacteria 
demonstrated to be equally effective in 
preventing the production of botu-
linum toxin at a level sufficient for the 
purpose of preventing the production of 
botulinum toxin. 
(C) The Department shall collect 
samples of bacon from establishments 
producing under paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of 
this section and analyze them for the 
level of nitrosamines. Samples shall be 
randomly selected throughout the pro-
duction of a lot. The actual sampling 
582 
9 CFR Ch. III (1–1–24 Edition) § 424.22 
plans and methods of analysis that are 
used will result in approximately the 
same likelihood as under paragraph 
(b)(1)(i) of this section of having a pre-
sumptive positive result when the true 
mean level of nitrosamines in a produc-
tion lot is 10 ppb. In the event of a pre-
sumptive positive result, the establish-
ment shall become subject to the pro-
visions of paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this 
section. 
(2) Immersion cured bacon. Immersion 
cured bacon may be placed in a brine 
solution containing salt, nitrite and 
flavoring material or in a container 
with salt, nitrite and flavoring mate-
rial. Sodium nitrite shall not exceed 
120 ppm ingoing or an equivalent 
amount of potassium nitrite (148 ppm 
ingoing) based on the actual or esti-
mated skin-free green weight of the 
bacon bellies. 
(3) Bacon made with dry curing mate-
rials. With respect to bacon made with 
dry curing materials, the product shall 
be cured by applying a premeasured 
amount of cure mixture to the bacon 
belly surfaces, completely covering the 
surfaces. Sodium nitrite shall not ex-
ceed 200 ppm ingoing or an equivalent 
amount of potassium nitrite (246 ppm 
ingoing) in dry cured bacon based on 
the actual or estimated skin-free green 
weight of the bacon belly. 
(c) Irradiation of meat food and poul-
try products. 
(1) General requirements. Meat food 
and poultry products may be treated to 
reduce foodborne pathogens and to ex-
tend product shelf-life by the use of 
sources of ionizing radiation as identi-
fied in 21 CFR 179.26(a). Official estab-
lishments must irradiate meat food 
and poultry products in accordance 
with 21 CFR 179.26(b), the Hazard Anal-
ysis and Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) system requirements in part 
417 of this chapter, and the provisions 
of this section. 
(2) Dosimetry. Official establishments 
that irradiate meat food and poultry 
products must have the following pro-
cedures in place: 
(i) Laboratory operation procedures 
for determining the absorbed dose 
value from the dosimeter. 
(ii) Calibration criteria for verifying 
the accuracy and consistency of any 
means of measurement ( e.g., time 
clocks and weight scales). 
(iii) Calibration and accountability 
criteria for verifying the traceability 
and accuracy of dosimeters for the in-
tended purpose, and the verification of 
calibration at least every 12 months. 
To confirm traceability, establish-
ments must relate, through docu-
mentation, the end point measurement 
of a dosimeter to recognized standards. 
(iv) Procedures for ensuring that the 
product unit is dose mapped to identify 
the regions of minimum and maximum 
absorbed dose and such regions are con-
sistent from one product unit to an-
other of like product. 
(v) Procedures for accounting for the 
total absorbed dose received by the 
product unit (e.g., partial applications 
of the absorbed dose within one produc-
tion lot). 
(vi) Procedures for verifying routine 
dosimetry, i.e., assuring each produc-
tion lot receives the total absorbed 
dose. Establishments may either posi-
tion one dosimeter at the regions of 
minimum and maximum absorbed dose 
(or at one region verified to represent 
such) on at least the first, middle, and 
last product unit in each production 
lot or use statistically based validation 
and dose mapping to determine the 
number and placement of dosimeters in 
each production lot. 
(vii) Procedures for verifying the re-
lationship of absorbed dose as meas-
ured by the dosimeter to time exposure 
of the product unit to the radiation 
source. 
(viii) Procedures for verifying the in-
tegrity of the radiation source and 
processing procedure. Aside from ex-
pected and verified radiation source ac-
tivity decay for radionuclide sources, 
the radiation source or processing pro-
cedure must not be altered, modified, 
replenished, or adjusted without re-
peating dose mapping of product units 
to redefine the regions of minimum 
and maximum absorbed dose. 
(3) Documentation. Official establish-
ments that irradiate meat food or poul-
try products must have the following 
documentation on premises, available 
to FSIS: 
(i) Documentation that the irradia-
tion facility is licensed or possesses 
gamma radiation sources registered 
583 
Food Safety and Inspection Service, USDA § 424.23 
with the Nuclear Regulatory Commis-
sion (NRC) or the appropriate State 
government acting under authority 
granted by the NRC. 
(ii) Documentation that the machine 
radiation source irradiation facility is 
registered with the appropriate State 
government, if applicable. 
(iii) Documentation that a worker 
safety program addressing OSHA regu-
lations (29 CFR chapter XVII) is in 
place. 
(iv) Citations or other documents 
that relate to incidences in which the 
establishment was found not to comply 
with Federal or State agency require-
ments for irradiation facilities. 
(v) A certification by the operator 
that the irradiation facility personnel 
will only operate under supervision of a 
person who has successfully completed 
a course of instruction for operators of 
food irradiation facilities. 
(vi) A certification by the operator 
that the key irradiation personnel, who 
monitor or control daily operations, 
have been trained in food technology, 
irradiation processing, and radiation 
health and safety. 
(vii) Guarantees from the suppliers of 
all food-contact packaging materials 
that may be subject to irradiation that 
those materials comply with the Fed-
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 
U.S.C. 301 et seq.). 
(4) Labeling. (i) The labels on pack-
ages of meat food and poultry products 
irradiated in their entirety, in con-
formance with this section and with 21 
CFR 179.26(a) and (b), must bear the 
logo shown at the end of this para-
graph. Unless the word ‘‘Irradiated’’ is 
part of the product name, labels also 
must bear a statement such as ‘‘Treat-
ed with radiation’’ or ‘‘Treated by irra-
diation.’’ The logo must be placed in 
conjunction with the required state-
ment, if the statement is used. The 
statement is not required to be more 
prominent than the declaration of in-
gredients required under § 317.2(c)(2) of 
this chapter. 
(ii) For meat food or poultry prod-
ucts that have been irradiated in their 
entirety, but that are not sold in pack-
ages, the required logo must be dis-
played to the purchaser with either the 
labeling of the bulk container plainly 
in view or a counter sign, card, or 
other appropriate device bearing the 
information that the product has been 
treated with radiation. In either case, 
the information must be prominently 
and conspicuously displayed to pur-
chasers. Unless the word ‘‘Irradiated’’ 
is part of the product name, the label-
ing counter sign, card, or other device 
also must bear a statement such as 
‘‘Treated with radiation’’ or ‘‘Treated 
by irradiation.’’ The logo must be 
placed in conjunction with the required 
statement, if the statement is used. 
(iii) The inclusion of an irradiated 
meat food or poultry product ingre-
dient in any multi-ingredient meat 
food or poultry product must be re-
flected in the ingredient statement on 
the finished product labeling. 
(iv) Optional labeling statements 
about the purpose for radiation proc-
essing may be included on the product 
label in addition to the stated require-
ments elsewhere in this section, pro-
vided that such statements are not 
false or misleading. Statements that 
there has been a specific reduction in 
microbial pathogens must be substan-
tiated by processing documentation. 
[64 FR 72175, Dec. 23, 1999, as amended at 64 
FR 72165, Dec. 23, 1999; 65 FR 34391, May 30, 
2000; 78 FR 66839, Nov. 7, 2013] 
§ 424.23 Prohibited uses. 
(a) Substances that conceal damage or 
inferiority or make products appear better 
or of greater value. No substance may be 
used in or on any meat if it conceals 
damage or inferiority or makes the 
